3.0 INTRODUCTION
Capital budgeting, and investment appraisal, is the planning process used to
determine whether an organization's long term investments such as purchase new
machinery, replacement of machinery, new plants, new products, and research
development projects are worth the funding of cash through the firm's capitalization
structure (debt, equity or retained earnings). It is the process of allocating resources for
major capital, or investment, expenditures. One of the primary goals of capital budgeting
investments is to increase the value of the firm to the shareholders.
An efficient allocation of capital is the most important finance function in modern times.
It involves decisions to commit the firm's funds to long-term assets. Capital budgeting or
investment decisions are of considerable importance to a firm since they tend to
determine its value by influencing its growth, profitability and risk. In this unit, we will
focus on the nature and evaluation of capital budgeting decisions. You will learn about
the net present value and internal rate of return methods. The unit will also discuss the
cost of capital, emphasizing on the calculation of cost of debt and equity capital and
retained earnings.
3.1 Learning Objectives
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  Understand the nature and importance of investment decisions.  Understand the capital budgeting and investment proccess, including planning
and control.  Explain the methods of calculating net present value (NPV) and internal rate of
return (IRR).  .Describe the non-DCF evaluation criteria: payback and accounting rate of
return.  Illustrate the computation of discounted payback. ,  Compare NPV and IRR and emphasize the superiority of NPV rule.  Understand how to take investment decisions under capital rationing.
3.2 NATURE AND TYPES OF INVESTMENT DECISIONS
The investment decisions of a firm are generally known as the capital budgeting, or
capital expenditure decisions. A capital budgeting decision may be defined as the firm's
decision to invest its current funds most efficiently in the long-term assets in anticipation
of an expected flow of benefits over a series of years. The long-term assets are those
that affect the firm's operations beyond the one-year period. The firm's investment
decisions would generally include expansion, acquisition, modernization and
replacement of the long-term assets. Sale of a division or business (divestment) is also
as an investment decision. Decisions like the change in the methods of sales
distribution, or an advertisement campaign or a research and development programme
have long-term implications for the firm's expenditures and benefits, and therefore, they
should also be evaluated as investment decisions. It is important to note that investment
in the long-term assets invariably requires large funds to be tied up in the current assets
such as inventories and receivables. As such, investment in fixed and current assets is
one single activity.
The following are the features of investment decisions:  The exchange of current funds for future benefits.  The funds are invested in long-term assets.  The future benefits will occur to the firm over a series of years.
It is significant to emphasize those expenditures and benefits of an investment
should be measured in cash. In the investment analysis, it is cash flow, which is
important, not the accounting profit. It may also be pointed out that investment decisions
affect the firm's value. The firm's value will increase if investments are profitable and
add to the shareholders' wealth. Thus, investments should be evaluated on the basis of
a criterion, which is compatible with the objective of the shareholders' wealth
maximization. An investment will add to the shareholders' wealth if it yields benefits in
excess of the minimum benefits as per the opportunity cost of capital. In this unit, we
assume that the investment project's opportunity cost of capital is known. We also
assume that the expenditures and benefits of the investment are known with certainty.
Both these assumptions are relaxed in later units.
3.2.1 Importance of Investment Decisions
Investment decisions require special attention because of the following reasons:1  They influence the firm's growth in the long run
 They affect the risk of the firm
 They involve commitment of large amount of funds
 They are irreversible, or reversible at substantial loss
 They are among the most difficult decisions to make.
Growth: The effects of investment decisions extend into the future and have to be
endured for a longer period than the consequences of the current operating
expenditure. A firm's decision to invest in long-term assets has a decisive influence on
the rate and direction of its growth. A wrong decision can prove disastrous for the
continued survival of the firm; unwanted or unprofitable expansion of assets will result in
heavy operating costs to the firm. On the other hand, inadequate investment in assets
would make it difficult for the firm to compete successfully and maintain its market
share.
Risk: A long-term commitment of funds may also change the risk complexity of the firm.
If the adoption of an investment increases average gain but causes frequent fluctuations
in its earnings, the firm will become more risky. Thus, investment decisions shape the
basic character of a firm.
Funding: Investment decisions generally involve large amount of funds, which make it
imperative for the firm to plan its investment programmes very carefully and make an
advance arrangement for procuring finances internally or externally.
Irreversibility: Most investment decisions are irreversible. It is difficult to find a market
for such capital items once they have been acquired. The firm will incur heavy losses if
such assets are scrapped.
Complexity: Investment decisions are among the firm's most difficult decisions. They
are an assessment of future events, which are difficult to predict. It is really a complex
problem to correctly estimate the future cash flows of an investment. Economic,
political, social and technological forces cause the uncertainty in cash flow estimation.
There are many ways to classify investments. One classification is as follows:  Expansion of existing business
 Expansion of new business
 Replacement and modernization.
3.2.2 Expansion and Diversification
A company may add capacity to its existing product
lines to expand existing operations. For example,
the Gujarat State Fertilizer Company (GSFC) may
increase its plant capacity to manufacture more
urea. It is an example of related diversification. A
firm may expand its activities in a new business.
Expansion of a new business requires investment
in new products and a new kind of production
activity within the firm. If a packaging manufacturing
company invests in a new plant and machinery to
produce ball bearings, which the firm has not
manufactured before, this represents expansion of
new business or unrelated diversification.
Sometimes a company acquires existing firms to
expand its business. In either case, the firm makes
investment in the expectation of additional revenue. Investments in existing or new
products may also be called as revenue-expansion investments.
3.2.3 Replacement and Modernization
The main objective of modernization and replacement is to improve operating efficiency
and reduce costs. Cost savings will reflect in the increased profits, but the firm's
revenue may remain unchanged. Assets become outdated and obsolete with
technological changes. The firm must decide to replace those assets with new assets
that operate more economically. If a cement company changes from semi-automatic
drying equipment to fully automatic drying equipment, it is an example of modernization
and replacement. Replacement decisions help to introduce more efficient and
economical assets and therefore, are also called cost-reduction investments. However,
Check Your Progress
1. How do we define capital
budgeting decisions?
2. How do we usually define
long-term assets?
3. What type of decisions
may be termed as a firm's
long-term investment
decisions?
4. Why do investment
decisions require special
attention from a firm's
management?
replacement decisions that involve substantial modernization and technological
improvements expand revenues as well as reduce costs.
Yet another useful way to classify investments is as follows:  Mutually exclusive investments
 Independent investments
 Contingent investments
3.2.4 Mutually Exclusive Investments
Mutually exclusive investments serve the same purpose and compete with each other. If
one investment is undertaken, others will have to be excluded. A company may, for
example, either use a more labour-intensive, semi-automatic machine, or employ a
more capital-intensive, highly automatic machine for production. Choosing the
semiautomatic machine precludes the acceptance of the highly automatic machine.
3.2.5 Independent Investments
Independent investments serve different purposes and do not compete with each other.
For example, a heavy engineering company may be considering expansion of its plant
capacity to manufacture additional excavators and addition of new production facilities
to manufacture a new product—light commercial vehicles. Depending on their
profitability and availability of funds, the company can undertake both investments.
3.2.6 Contingent Investments
Contingent investments are dependent projects; the choice of one investment
necessitates undertaking one or more other investments. For example, if a company
decides to build a factory in a remote, backward area, it may have to invest in houses,
roads, hospitals, schools etc. for employees to attract the work force. Thus, building of
factory also requires investment in facilities for employees. The total expenditure will be
treated as one single investment.
3.3 INVESTMENT EVALUATION CRITERIA
Three steps are involved in the evaluation of an investment:  Estimation of cash flows
 Estimation of the required rate of return (the opportunity cost of capital)  Application of a decision rule for making the choice
The first two steps, discussed in the subsequent units, are assumed as given. Thus, our
discussion in this unit is confined to the third step. Specifically, we focus on the merits
and demerits of various decision rules.
3.3.1 Investment Decision Rule
The investment decision rules may be referred to as capital budgeting techniques, or
investment criteria. A sound appraisal technique should be used to measure the
economic worth of an investment project. The essential property of a sound technique is
that it should maximize the shareholders' wealth. The following other characteristics
should also be possessed by a sound investment evaluation criterion:2  It should consider all cash flows to determine the true profitability of the project.  It should provide for an objective and unambiguous way of separating good
projects from bad projects.  It should help ranking of projects according to their true profitability.  It should recognize the fact that bigger cash flows are preferable to smaller ones
and early cash flows are preferable to later ones.  It should help to choose among mutually exclusive projects that project which
maximizes the shareholders' wealth.  It should be a criterion which is applicable to any conceivable investment project
independent of others.
These conditions will be clarified as we discuss the features of various investment
criteria in the following pages.
3.3.2 Evaluation Criteria
A number of investment criteria (or capital budgeting techniques) are in practice. They
may be grouped in the following two categories:
1. Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Criteria
 Net present value (NPV)  Internal rate of return (IRR)  Profitability index (PI)
2. Non-discounted Cash Flow Criteria
 Payback period (PB)  Discounted payback period
 Accounting rate of return (ARR)
Discounted payback is a variation of the
payback method. It involves discounted cash flows,
but, as we shall see later, it is not a true measure of investment profitability. We will
show in the following pages that the net present value criterion is the most valid
technique of evaluating an investment project. It is consistent with the objective of
maximising the shareholders' wealth.
3.4 NET PRESENT VALUE METHOD
The net present value (NPV) method is the classic economic method of evaluating the
investment proposals. It is a DCF technique that explicitly recognizes the time value of
money. It correctly postulates that cash flows arising at different time periods differ in
value and are comparable only when their equivalents—present values—are found out.
The following steps are involved in the calculation of NPV:
Check Your Progress
5. Which are the two main
categories in which we divide the
evaluation criteria of capital
budgeting decisions?
 Cash flows of the investment project should be forecasted based on realistic
assumptions.  Appropriate discount rate should be identified to discount the forecasted cash
flows. The appropriate discount rate is the project's opportunity cost of capital,
which is equal to the required rate of return expected by investors on investments
of equivalent risk.  Present value of cash flows should be calculated using the opportunity cost of
capital as the discount rate.  Net present value should be found out by subtracting present value of cash
outflows from present value of cash inflows. The project should be accepted if
NPV is positive (i.e., NPV > 0).
Let us consider an example.
Illustration 3.1: Calculating Net Present Value
Assume that Project A costs Rs3000 now and is expected to generate year-end cash
inflows of Rs 1000, Rs 900, Rs 800, Rs 700, and Rs 600 in 5 years. The opportunity
cost of the capital may be assumed to be 10 per cent.
The net present value for Project A can be calculated by referring to the present value
table. The calculations are shown below:
NPV = ( . )
+
( . )
+
( . )
+
( . )
+
( . ) − 3500
NPV = [Rs 1000(PVF1,0.10)+ Rs 900(PVF2,0.10)+ Rs 800(PVF3,0.10)+ Rs 700(PVF4,0.10)+
Rs 600(PVF5,0.10)]- Rs 3000
NPV = [Rs 1000x 0.909+Rs 900x0.826+Rs 800x 0.751+Rs 700x 0.683+Rs 600 x
0.6201 - Rs 3000
NPV = Rs 3,104 - Rs 3,000=+ Rs 104
Thus, it generates a positive net present value (NPV = Rs 104). Project A adds to the
wealth of owners; therefore, it should be accepted.
The formula for the net present value can be written as follows:
NPV=V= ( )
+
( )
+ ⋯ ( ) − (1)
where A1, A2... represent net cash inflows (after but before depreciation) in year 1, 2...,
A0 is the initial cost of the investment and n is the expected life of the investment. I=rate
of interest
3.4.1 Why is NPV Important?
A question may be raised: why should a financial manager invest Rs 3,000in Project A?
Project A should be undertaken if it is best for the company's shareholders; they would
like their shares to be as valuable as possible. Let us assume that the total market value
of a hypothetical company is Rs 10,000, which includes Rs 3,000 cash that can be
invested in Project A. Thus the value of the company's other assets must be Rs 7,000.
The company has to decide whether it should spend cash and accept Project A or to
keep the cash and reject Project A. Clearly Project A is desirable since its PV (Rs
3,104) is greater than the Rs 3,000 cash. If Project A is accepted, the total market
value of the firm will be: Rs 7,000 +• PV of Project A = Rs 7,000 + Rs 3104 = Rs
10,104; that is, an increase by Rs 104. The company's total market value would remain
only Rs 10,000 if Project A was rejected. 3.4.2 Acceptance Rule
It should be clear that the acceptance rule using the NPV method is to accept the
investment project if its net present value is positive (NPV > 0) and to reject it if the net
present value is negative (NPV < 0). Positive NPV contributes to the net wealth of the
shareholders, which should result in the increased price of a firm's share. The positive
net present value will result only if the project generates cash inflows at a rate higher
than the opportunity cost of capital. A project with zero NPV (NPV = 0) may be
accepted. A zero NPV implies that project generates cash flows at a rate just equal to
the opportunity cost of capital. The NPV acceptance rules are:  Accept the project when NPV is positive NPV > 0
 Reject the project when NPV is negative NPV < 0
 May accept the project when NPV is zero NPV = 0
The NPV method can be used to select between mutually exclusive projects; the one
with the higher NPV should be selected. Using the NPV method, projects would be
ranked in order of net present values; that is, first rank will be given to the project with
highest positive net present value and so on.
3.4.3 Evaluation of NPV Method
NPV is the true measure of an investment's profitability. It provides the most acceptable
investment rule for the following reasons: • Time value: It recognizes the time value of money—a rupee received today is
worth more than a rupee received tomorrow. • Measure of true profitability: It uses all cash flows occurring over the entire life
of the project in calculating its worth. Hence, it is a measure of the project's true
profitability. The NPV method relies on estimated cash flows and the discount
rate rather than any arbitrary assumptions, or subjective considerations. • Value-additivity : The discounting process facilitates measuring cash flows in
terms of present values; that is, in terms of equivalent, current rupees. Therefore,
the NPVs of projects can be added. For example, NPV (A + B) = NPV (A) + NPV
(B). This is called the value-additivity principle. It implies that if we know the
NPVs of individual projects, the value of the firm will increase by the sum of their
NPVs. We can also say that if we know values of individual assets, the firm's
value can simply be found by adding their values. The value-additivity is an
important property of an investment criterion because it means that each project
can be evaluated, independent of others, on its own merit.
• Shareholder value: The NPV method is always consistent with the objective of
maximization of the shareholder value. This is the greatest virtue of me method.
Are there any limitations in using the NPV rule? The NPV method is a theoretically
sound method. In practice, it may pose some computational problems. • Cash flow estimation: The NPV method is easy to use if forecasted cash flows
are known. In practice, it is quite difficult to obtain the estimates of cash flows
due to uncertainty. • Discount rate: It is also difficult in practice to precisely measure the discount rate. • Mutually exclusive projects: Further, caution needs to be applied in using the
NPV method when alternative (mutually exclusive) projects with unequal lives, or
under funds constraint are evaluated. The NPV rule may not give unambiguous
results in these situations. • Ranking of projects: It should be noted that the ranking of investment projects as
per the NPV rule is not independent of the discount rates.4 Let us consider an
example.
Suppose two projects—X and Y—both costing Rs. 50 each. Project X returns Rs.100
after one year and Rs. 25 after two years. On the other hand, Project Y returns Rs. 30
after one year and Rs. 100 after two years. At discount rates of 5 per cent and 10 per
cent, the NPV of projects and their ranking are as follows:
NPV at 5% Rank NPV at 10% Rank
Project X 67.92 II 61.57 I
Project Y 69.27 I 59.91 II
It can be seen that the project ranking is reversed
when the discount rate is changed from 5 per cent to
10 per cent. The reason lies in the cash flow
patterns. The impact of the discounting becomes
more severe for the cash flow occurring later in the
life of the project; the higher is the discount rate, the
higher would be the discounting impact. In the case
of Project Y, the larger cash flows come later in the
life. Their present value will decline as the discount
rate increases.
3.5 INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN METHOD
The internal rate of return (IRR) method is another
discounted cash flow technique, which takes account
of the magnitude and timing of cash flows. It is the
rate which equates the present value of the expected future cash flows with the cost of
the investment. Other terms used to describe the IRR method are yield on an
investment, marginal efficiency of capital, rate of return over cost, time-adjusted rate of
internal return and so on. The concept of internal rate of return is quite simple to
understand in the case of a one-period project. Assume that you deposit Rs 10,000 with
Check Your Progress
6. Describe the basic
approach of calculating the
net present value of an
investment proposal.
7. Why is NPV method
considered perhaps the best
method for evaluating the
profitability of a project? Are
there any difficulties
associated with this method?
a bank and would get back Rs 10,800 after one year. The true rate of return on your
investment would be:
Rate of return = = − 10000 = 1.08 − 1 = 0.08 or, 8%
The amount that you would obtain in the future (Rs. 10,800) would consist of your
investment (Rs. 10,000) plus return on your investment (0.08 x Rs. 10,000):
10,000(1.08)= 10,800
10,000 = ( . )
You may observe that the rate of return of your investment (8 per cent) makes the
discounted (present) value of your cash inflow Rs ( 10,800) equal to your investment
(Rs. 10,000).
We can now develop a formula for the rate of return (r) on an investment (C0) that
generates a single cash flow after one period (C1) as follows:
r = = − 1 (2)
Equation (2) can be rewritten as follows:
= 1+r
C0 =
( ) (3)
From Equation (3), you may notice that the rate of return, r, depends on the project's
cash flows, rather than any outside factor. Therefore, it is referred to as the internal rate
of return. The internal rate of return (IRR) is the rate that equates the investment outlay
with the present value of cash inflow received after one period. This also implies that the
rate of return is the discount rate which makes NPV = 0. There is no satisfactory way of
defining the true rate of return of a long-term asset. IRR is the best available concept.
We shall see that although it is a very frequently used concept in finance, yet at times it
can be a misleading measure of investment worth. IRR can be determined by solving
the following equation for r.
C0 =
( )
+
( )
+
( )
+ ⋯ +
( )
C0=∑
( )
∑
( ) -C0 =0 (4)
It can be noticed that the ERR equation is the same as the one used for the NPV
method. In the NPV method, the required rate of return, k, is known and the net present
value is found, while in the IRR method the value of r has to be determined at which the
net present value becomes zero.
3.5.1 Calculating IRR by Trial and Error
The value of r in Equation (2) can be found out by trial and error. The approach is to
select any discount rate to compute me present value of cash inflows. If the calculated
present value of the expected cash inflow is lower than the present value of cash
outflows, a lower rate should be tried. On me other hand, a higher value should be tried
if the present value of inflows is higher than the present value of outflows. This process
will be repeated unless the net present value becomes zero. The following illustration
explains the procedure of calculating IRR.
Illustration 3.2: Trial and Error Method for Calculating IRR
A project costs Rs. 16,000 and is expected to generate cash inflows of Rs. 8,000, Rs.
7,000 and Rs. 6,000 at the end of each year for next 3 years. We know that IRR is the
rate at which project will have a zero NPV. As a first step, we try (arbitrarily) a 20 per
cent discount rate. The project's NPV at 20 per cent is:
NPV = - Rs.16,000+Rs.8,000(PVF1.020)+Rs. 7,000(PVF2,0.20)+Rs.6,000(PVF3, 0.20) = - Rs.16,000+Rs.8,000x0.833+Rs.7,000x0.694+Rs.6,000x0.579 = -Rs. 16,000+Rs. 14,996=-Rs. 1,004
A negative NPV of Rs. 1,004 at 20 per cent indicates that the project's true rate of return
is lower than 20 per cent. Let us try 16 per cent as the discount rate. At 16 per cent, the
project's NPV is:
NPV = -Rs.16,000+Rs.8,000(PVF1,0.16)+Rs.7,000(PVF2,0.16)+Rs.6,000(PVF3, 0.16) = -Rs.16,000+Rs.8,000x0.862+Rs.7,000x0.743+Rs.6,000x0.641 = -Rs. 16,000+Rs. 15,943=-Rs. 57
Since the project's NPV is still negative at 16 per cent, a rate lower than 16 per cent
should be tried. When we select 15 per cent as the trial rate, we find that the project's
NPV is Rs. 200:
NPV = -Rs.16,000+Rs.8,000(PVF1,0.15)+ Rs. 7,000(PVF2,0.15)+Rs.6,000(PVF3,0.15) = -Rs.16,000 + Rs.8,000x0.870 + Rs.7,000x0.756 + Rs. 6,000x0.658 = -Rs. 16,000 + Rs. 16,200 = Rs. 200
The true rate of return should lie between 15-16 per cent. We can find out a close
approximation of the rate of return by the method of linear interpolation as follows:
3.5.2 NPV Profile and IRR
We repeat to emphasize that NPV of a project declines as the discount rate increases,
and for discount rates higher than the project's IRR, NPV will be negative. NPV profile of
the project at various discount rates is shown in Table 2.2. At 16 per cent, the NPV is
zero; therefore, it is the IRR of the project. As you may notice, we have used the Excel
spreadsheet to make the computations and create the chart using the Excel chart
wizard.
Table 2.2 NPV Profile
Table 2.2 NPV Profile
3.5.3 Acceptance Rule
The accept-or-reject rule, using the IRR method, is to accept the project if its internal
rate of return is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (r > k). Note that k is also
known as the required rate of return, or the cut-off. The project shall be rejected if its
internal rate of return is lower than the opportunity cost of capital (r < k). The decision
maker may remain indifferent if the internal rate of return is equal to the opportunity cost
of capital. Thus the IRR acceptance rules are:  Accept the project when r > k
 Reject the project when r < k
 May accept the project when r = k
3.5.4 Evaluation of IRR Method
Difference
PV required Rs. 16,000
200
PV at lower rate, 15% 16,200
257
PV at higher rate, 16% 15,943
r = 15% + (16% - 15%)200/257
= 15%+ 0.80%= 15.8%
1 NPV Profile
2 Cash Flow Discount
Rate NPV
3 -20000 0% 12580
4 5430 5% 7561
5 5430 10% 3649
6 5430 15% 550
7 5430 16% 0
8 5430 20% (1942)
9 5430 25% (3,974)
NPV 15000
10000
5000
-
(5000)
0% 10% 16% 20% 30%
Discount Rate
The IRR method is like the NPV method. It is a popular investment criterion since it
measures profitability as a percentage and can be easily compared with the opportunity
cost of capital. IRR method has following merits:  Time value: The IRR method recognizes the time value of money.  Profitability measure: It considers all cash flows occurring over the entire life of the
project to calculate its rate of return.  Acceptance rule: It generally gives the same acceptance rule as the NPV method.  Shareholder value: It is consistent with the shareholders' wealth maximization
objective. Whenever a project's IRR is greater than the opportunity cost of capital,
the shareholders' wealth will be enhanced.
Like the NPV method, the IRR method is also theoretically a sound investment
evaluation criterion. However, IRR rule can give misleading and inconsistent results
under certain circumstances. Here we briefly mention the problems that IRR method
may suffer from.  Multiple rates: A project may have multiple rates, or it may not have a unique rate
of return. As we explain later on, these problems arise because of the mathematics
of IRR computation.  Mutually exclusive projects: It may also fail to indicate a correct choice between
mutually exclusive projects under certain situations. This pitfall of the IRR method is
elaborated later on in this unit.  Value additivity: Unlike in the case of the NPV method, the value additivity principle
does not hold when the IRR method is used—IRRs of projects do not add.7 Thus,
for Projects A and B, IRR(A) + IRR(B) need not be equal to IRR (A + B). Consider an
example given below.
The NPV and IRR of Projects A and B are given below:
Project C0
(`)
C1
(`)
NPV @ 10%
(`)
IRR
(%)
A -100 + 120 + 9.1 r 20.0
B -150 + 168 + 2.7 12.0
A + B -250 + 288 + 11.8 15.2
It can be seen from the example that NPVs of projects add:
NPV(A) + NPV(B) = NPV(A + B) = 9.1 + 2.7 = 11.8, while
IRR(A) + IRR(B) IRR(A + B) = 20%+12% # 15.2%
3.5.5 NPV versus IRR
The net present value and the internal rate of return methods are two closely related
investment criteria. Both are time-adjusted methods of measuring investment worth. In
case of independent projects, two methods lead to same decisions. However, under
certain situations (to be discussed later in this section), a conflict arises between them.
It is under these cases that a choice between the two criteria has to be made.
Equivalence of NPV and IRR: Case of Conventional Independent Projects
It is important to distinguish between conventional and non-conventional investments in
discussing the comparison between NPV and IRR methods. A conventional investment
can be defined as one whose cash flows take the pattern of an initial cash outlay
followed by cash inflows. Conventional projects have only one change in the sign of
cash flows; for example, the initial outflow followed by inflows, i.e., - + + +. A non- conventional investment, on the other hand, is one, which has cash outflows mingled
with cash inflows throughout the life of the project.8 Non-conventional investments have
more than one change in the signs of cash flows; for example, - +
In case of conventional investments, which are economically independent of mil other,
NPV and IRR methods result in same accept-or-reject decision if the firm be is not
constrained for funds in accepting all profitable projects. Same projects would be
indicated profitable by both methods. The logic is simple to understand. As has been
explained earlier, all projects with positive net present values would be accepted. If the
NPV method is used, or projects with internal rates of return higher than the internal
rates of return would be accepted if the IRR method were followed. The last marginal
project acceptable under the NPV method is the one, which has zero net present value;
while using the IRR method, this project will have an internal rate of return equal to the
required rate of return. Projects with positive net present values would also have
internal rates of return higher than the required rate of return and the marginal project
will have zero present value only when its internal rate of return is equal to the required
rate of return.
We know that NPV is:
NPV=∑
( ) -C0 (5)
and IRR is that rate r which satisfies the following equation:
NPV=∑
( ) -C0 = 0 (6)
Subtracting Equation (6 from Equation (5), we get
NPV=∑
( ) −
( ) (7)
As we know that C(, A:, r and t are positive, NPV can be positive (NPV > 0) only
if r > k. NPV would be zero if and only if r = k and it would be negative (NPV < 0) If r < k. Thus, we find that NPV and IRR methods are equivalent as regards the acceptance or
rejection of independent conventional investments.
Figure 2.2 also substantiates this argument where oa2 represents the highest net
present value for the project at zero discount rate; at this point NPV is simply the
difference between cash inflows and cash outflows. At r2, discount rate, the net present
value is zero and therefore, by definition, r, is the internal rate of return of the project.
For discount rate (say r3) greater than IRR, the net present value would be negative.
Conversely, for discount rate (say r1) lower than IRR, the net present value of the
project will be positive. Thus, if the required rate of return is r., the project will be
accepted under both methods since the net present value, oa1 is greater than zero and
internal rate, r2, exceeds the required rate, r1. Project could also be accepted if the
required rate is r2 as net present value is zero and the required rate and internal rate are
equal. But the project would be rejected under either method if the required rate is r3, as
the net present value is negative and the internal rate of return is lower than the
required rate of return (i.e., r2 < r3).
Assuming
= x, we obtain – 3,750x2 + 4,000x-1,000 = 0
This is a quadratic equation of the form: ax2 + bx
+ c = Q, and we can solve it by using the
following formula:
x=
± √
Substituting values, we obtain
x =
± ( ) ( )
( )
x =
± = , Since x = , therefore = , =
r = or 150%, r = = 50%
It is obvious from the above calculation that Project I yields dual rates of return:
50 per cent and 150 per cent. At these two rates of return the net, present value of the
project is zero. It needs to be emphasized here that this dilemma does not arise when
the NPV method is used—we have simply to specify the required rate of return and find
NPV. The relationship between discount rates and NPVs are shown in Figure 2.4,
where the discount rate is plotted along the horizontal axis and net present value along
the vertical axis.
At zero rate of discount, the net present value of the project is simply the
difference of undiscounted cash flows. It is - Rs. 750 for Project I (- 1,000 + 4,000 -3,750 = - 750). As the discount rate increases, the negative net present value diminishes and
becomes zero at 50 per cent. The positive net present value increases as the discount
Check Your Progress
8. Define the basic method of
calculating the internal rate of
return (IRR) while appraising an
investment project.
9. In the IRR system, how do we
decide which projects to accept
or reject ?
10. What is the main difference
between the concepts of NPV
and IRRRs.
rate exceeds 50 per cent, but reaching a maximum it starts decreasing and at 150 per
cent it again becomes zero.
It should be clear from Figure 2.4 that Project I combines the features of both lending
and borrowing.'' The first part of the figure has an upward slope typical of a loan; the
second part has a downward slope typical of an ordinary investment (lending). Since the
NPV curve cuts the horizontal-axis twice, the project has two rates of return, 50 and 150
per cent.
Which of the two rates is correct? None. The project would be worthwhile only
when the opportunity cost of the capital falls between these two rates; NPV is positive at
the discount rates ranging between 50 and 150 per cent.
The number of rates of return depends on the number of times the sip of the
cash flow stream changes. In the case of Project I above, there are two reversals of
sign (- + -), and there are two rates of return. Reversal of sign is a necessary but not n
sufficient condition for multiple rates of return.
A number of adaptations of the IRR criterion have been suggested to take care of
the problem of multiple rates. In our opinion, none of them will work satisfactorily. The
simple, straightforward alternative is to use the NPV rule.
Difference: Case of ranking mutually exclusive projects
We have shown that the NPV and IRR methods yield the same accept-or-reject rule in
case of independent conventional investments. However, in real business situations
there are alternative ways of achieving an objective and, thus, accepting one alternative
will mean excluding the other. As defined earlier, investment projects are said to be
mutually exclusive when only one investment could be accepted and others would
have to be excluded.12 For example, in order to distribute its products a company may
decide either to establish its own sales organization or engage outside distributors. The
more profitable out of the two alternatives shall be selected. This type of exclusiveness
may be referred to as technical exclusiveness. On the other hand, two independent
250
NPV Rs 63
0
-250
-500
-750
0 50 100 150 200 250
Discount Rate (%)
Fig. 2.4 Dual Rales of Return
projects may also be mutually exclusive if a financial constraint is imposed. If limited
funds are available to accept either Project A or Project B, this would be an example of
financial exclusiveness or capital rationing. The NPV and IRR methods can give
conflicting ranking to mutually exclusive projects. In the case of independent projects
ranking is not important since all profitable projects will be accepted. Ranking of
projects, however, becomes crucial in the case of mutually exclusive projects. Since the
NPV and IRR rules can give conflicting ranking to projects, one cannot remain
indifferent as to the choice of the rule.
The NPV and ERR rules will give conflicting ranking to the projects under the following
conditions:  The cash flow pattern of the projects may differ. That is, the cash flows of one
project may increase over time, while those of others may decrease or vice
versa.  The cash outlays (initial investments) of the projects may differ.  The projects may have different expected lives.
Timing of cash flows: The most commonly found condition for the conflict between the
NPV and IRR methods is the difference in the timing of cash flows. Let us consider the
following two Projects, M and N.
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 at 9% IRR
M -1680 1400 700 140 301 23%
N -1680 140 840 1510 321 17%
At 9 per cent discount rate, project N has higher NPV of Rs. 321 than Project
ATs NPV of Rs. 301. However, Project N has a lower IRR of 17 per cent than Project
M's IRR of 23 per cent. Why this conflict?. Which project should we accept?. Let us see
how NPVs of Projects M and N behave with discount rates. The NPV profiles of two
projects would be as shown in Table 2.5.
The net present values of Projects M and N, as a function of discount rates, are
plotted in Figure 2.5. It is noticeable from the NPV calculations as well as from Figure
2.5 that the present value of Project N falls rapidly as the discount rate increases. The
reason is that its largest cash flows come late in life, when the compounding effect of
time is most significant. Reverse is true with Project M as its largest cash flows come
early in the life when compounding effect is not so severe. The internal rates of Projects
M and N respectively are 23 per cent and 17 per cent. The NPV profiles of two projects
intersect at 10 per cent discount rate. This is called Fisher's intersection.14
Table 2.3 NPV Profiles of Projects M and N
Discount Rate (%) Project M Project N
0 560 810
5 409 520
10 276 276
15 159 70
20 54 -106
25 -40 -251
30 - 125 -388
Fisher's intersection occurs at the discount rate where the NPVs of two projects are
equal. We can determine the discount rate at which Fisher's intersection occurs as
follows:
-1680+( ∗
)
+
( ∗
)
+
( ∗
) = -1680+( ∗
)
+
( ∗
)
+
( ∗
)
This equation can be simplified by bringing all terms over the left-hand side. -
( ∗
)
+
( ∗
)
+
( ∗
) = 0
Solving for r*—Fisher's intersection rate—by trial and error, we obtain: r* = 10%. We
can write the following formula for determining the rate at which Fisher's intersection
occurs for two Projects M and N:
NPVM = NPVN
∑ ∗ − = ∑ ∗ − (8)
It is notable from Table 2.5 and Figure 2.5 that at the discount rates less than the
intersection rate (10 per cent). Project N has the higher NPV but lower IRR (17 percent).
On the other hand, at the discount rates greater than the intersection rate (10 per cent).
Project M has both higher NPV as well as higher IRR (23 per cent). Thus, if the required
rate of return is greater than the intersection rate, both NPV and IRR methods will yield
consistent results. That is, the project with higher internal rate of Mini n will also have
higher net present value. However, if the required rate of return is than the intersection
rate, the two methods will give contradictory results. That is, the project with higher
internal rate of return will have lower net present value and Vice versa.
Which project should we choose between Projects M and NRs. Both projects
generate positive net present value at 9 per cent opportunity cost of capital. Therefore,
both are profitable. But Project N is better since it has a higher NPV. The IRR rule,
however, indicates that we should choose Project M as it has a higher IRR. If we
choose Project N, following the NPV rule, we shall be richer by an additional value of
120. Should we have the satisfaction of earning a higher rate of return, or should we like
to be richer ? The NPV rule is consistent with the objective of maximizing wealth. When
we have to choose between mutually exclusive projects, the easiest procedure is to
compare the NPVs of the projects and choose the one with the larger NPV.
Incremental approach: It is argued that the IRR method can still be used to
choose between mutually exclusive projects if we adapt it to calculate rate of return on
the incremental cash flows. If we prefer Project N to Project M, there should be
incremental benefits in doing so. To see this, let us calculate the incremental flows of
Project N over Project M. We obtain the following cash flows:
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 at 9% IRR
(N-M) 0 -1260 140 1370 20 10%
The IRR on the incremental flows is 10 per cent. It is more than the opportunity
cost of 9 per cent. Therefore, Project N should be accepted. Project N is better than
Project M despite its lower IRR because it offers all benefits that Project M offers plus
the opportunity of an incremental investment at 10 per cent—a rate higher than 11io
required rate of return of 9 per cent. It may be noticed that the NPV of the Incremental
flows is the difference of the NPV of Project N over that of Project M; this is so because
of the value-additivity principle.
The incremental approach is a satisfactory way of salvaging the IRR rule. But the
series of incremental cash flows may result in negative and positive cash flows (i.e.,
lending and borrowing type pattern). This would result in multiple rates of return and
ultimately the NPV method will have to be used.
Some people find it difficult to appreciate that the IRR rule can mislead. Let us,
for instance, assume that we are considering two mutually exclusive Projects M and N,
and we are also contemplating an investment opportunity, say Project O, to occur after
one year. Project O has the following cash follows:
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 at 9% IRR
O 0 -1400 700 948 37 11%
We have established so far that Project N is better than Project M, since it adds
more wealth. Still some may argue in favour of Project M. Their reasoning could I that if
we accept Project M today, we would also be able to undertake Project O ne; year that
can be financed out of the cash flows generated by Project M in the fir year. This
reasoning implies a capital shortage next year to undertake Project O if Project M is
rejected in the absence of capital constraint. Project N is definitely better (NPV is
higher) than Project M, and Project O can also be accepted next year by raising Rs.
1,260 at a rate equal to the cost of capital. It is very unlikely that the large companies
would face capital constraint. However, some companies do impose capital rationing on
their divisions for control purposes. Such impositions are thought to b real constraints by
management people at the lower levels. Even if there is a capital constraint, real or selfimposed, the IRR rule cannot be used for ranking projects. The problem under capital
rationing is to determine the portfolio of projects, which have the largest net present
value satisfying such portfolio. We shall show later on that this problem can be handled
through the programming techniques.
Settlement of investment: Another condition, under which the NPV and IRR methods
will give contradictory ranking to the projects, is when the cash outlays are of different
sizes. Let us consider Projects A and B, involving following cash flows:
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 at 10% IRR
A -1000 1500 364 50%
B -100000 120000 9091 20%
Project A's NPV at 10 per cent required rate of return of `. 364 and IRR is 50
percent. Project B’s NPV at 10 per cent required rate of return is `. 9,091 and internal
rate of return is 20 per cent. Thus, the two projects are ranked differently by the NPV
and IRR rules.
As we have explained earlier, the NPV method gives unambiguous results. Since
the NPV of Project B is high, it should be accepted. The same result will be obtained if
we calculate the internal rate of return on the incremental investment:
The incremental investment of `. 99,000 (i.e., `. 100,000 - `. 1,000) will generate
cash inflow of `. 118,500 after a year. Thus, the return on the incremental investment is
19.7 per cent, which is in excess of the 10 per cent required rate of return. We should,
therefore, prefer Project B to Project-4.
Project life span: Difference in the life spans of two mutually exclusive projects can
also give rise to the conflict between the NPV and IRR rules. To illustrate, let us
consider two mutually exclusive Projects, X and Y, of significantly different expected
lives:
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 at 10% IRR
X -10000 -12000 - - - - 909 20%
Y -10000 0 0 0 0 20120 2493 15%
Both the projects require initial cash outlays of `. 10,000 each. Project X generates a
cash flow of `. 12,000 at the end of one year, while Project Y generated cash flow of `.
20,120 at the end of fifth year. At 10 per cent required rate of return, Project X's net
present value is `. 908 and internal rate of return is 20 per cent, while Project Ts net
present value is `. 2,495 and internal rate of return is 15 per cent. Thus, the two
methods rank the projects differently. The NPV rule can be used to choose between the
projects since it is always consistent with the wealth maximization principle. Thus,
Project Y should be preferred since it has higher NPV. The problem of choosing
between the short and long-lived assets, which have to be replaced in future, is
discussed later on.
3.6 PAYBACK
The payback (PB) is one of the most popular and widely recognized traditional methods
of evaluating investment proposals. It is based on the assumption that the degree of risk
associated with the fixed asset is the length of time required to recover the investment
from the firm’s cash flow. Payback is the number of years required to recover the
original cash outlay invested in a project. If the project generates constant annual cash
inflows, the payback period can be computed by dividing cash outlay by the annual
cash inflow. That is:
Payback = =
Illustration 34: Payback (Constant Cash Flows)
Assume that a project requires an outlay of Rs 2,00,000 and yields annual cash inflow
of Rs 40000 for 9 years. The payback period for the project is:
PB= . = 5years
Unequal cash flows: In case of unequal cash inflows, the payback period can be found
out by adding up the cash inflows until the total is equal to the initial cash outlay.
Consider the following example.
Illustration 35: Payback (Uneven Cash Flows)
Suppose that a project requires a cash outlay of Rs 20,000, and generates cash inflows
of Rs 8,000; Rs 7,000; Rs 4,000; and Rs 3,000 during the next 4 years. What is the
project's payback?. When we add up the cash inflows, we find that in the first three
years Rs 19,000 of the original outlay is recovered. In the fourth year cash inflow
generated is Rs 3,000 and only Rs 1,000 of the original outlay remains to be recovered.
Assuming that the cash inflows occur evenly during the year, the time required to
recover Rs 1,000 will be (Rs 1,000/ Rs 3,000) x 12 months = 4 months. Thus, the
payback period is 3 years and 4 months.
3.6.1 Acceptance Rule
Many firms use the payback period as an investment evaluation criterion and a method
of ranking projects. They compare the project's payback with a predetermined, standard
payback. The project would be accepted if it’s payback period is less than the maximum
or standard payback period set by management. As a ranking method, it gives highest
ranking to the project, which has the shortest payback period and lowest ranking to the
project with highest payback period. Thus, if the firm has to choose between two
mutually exclusive projects, the project with shorter payback period will be selected.
3.6.2 Evaluation of Payback
Payback is a popular investment criterion in practice, lt is considered to have certain
virtues.
Simplicity: The most significant merit of payback is that it is simple to understand and
easy to calculate. The business executives consider the simplicity of method as a virtue.
This is evident from their heavy reliance on it for appraising investment proposals in
practice.  Cost effective: Payback method costs less than most of the sophisticated
techniques that require a lot of the analysts" time and the use of computers.  Short-term effects: A company can have more favorable short-run effects on
earnings per share by setting up a shorter standard payback period.16 It should,
however, be remembered that this may not be a wise long-term policy as the
company may have to sacrifice its future growth for current earnings.  Risk shield: The risk of the project can be tackled by having a shorter standard
payback period as it may ensure guarantee against loss. A company has to invest in
many projects where the cash inflows and life expectancies are highly uncertain.
Under such circumstances, payback may become important, not so much as a
measure of profitability but as a means of establishing an upper bound on the
acceptable degree of risk.17  Liquidity: The emphasis in payback is on the early recovery of the investment.
Thus, it gives an insight into the liquidity of the project. The funds so released can be
put to other uses.  In spite of its simplicity and the so-called virtues, the payback may not be a desirable
investment criterion since it suffers from a number of serious limitations:  Cash flows after payback: Payback fails to take account of the cash inflows earned
after the payback period. For example, consider the following projects X and Y:
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 Payback NPV
X -4000 0 4000 2000 2 years +806
Y -4000 2000 2000 0 3 years -530
As per the payback rule, both the projects are equally desirable since both return the
investment outlay in two years. If we assume an opportunity cost of 10 per cent, Project
X yields a positive net present value of X 806 and Project Y yields a negative net
present value of Rs. 530. As per the NPV rule. Project X should be accepted and
Project Y rejected. Payback rule gave wrong results because it failed to consider Rs.
2,000 cash flow in third year for Project X.
 Cash flows ignored: Payback is not an appropriate method of measuring the
profitability of an investment project as it does not consider all cash inflows yielded
by the project. Considering Project X again, payback rule did not take into account
its entire series of cash flows.  Cash flow patterns: Payback fails to consider the pattern of cash inflows, i.e.,
magnitude and timing of cash inflows. In other words, it gives equal weights to
returns of equal amounts even though they occur in different time periods. For
example, compare the following projects C and D where they involve equal cash
outlay and yield equal total cash inflows over equal time periods:
Cash Flow (`) NPV
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 Payback NPV
C -5000 3000 2000 2000 2 years +881
D -5000 2000 3000 2000 2 years + 798
Using payback period, both projects are equally desirable. But Project C should be
preferable as larger cash inflows' come earlier in its life. This is indicated by the NPV
rule; project C has higher NPV (Rs 881) than Project D (Rs 798) at 10 per cent
opportunity cost. It should be thus clear that payback is not a measure of profitability. As
such, it is dangerous to use it as a decision criterion.  Administrative difficulties: A firm may face difficulties in determining the
maximum acceptable payback period. There is no rational basis for setting a
maximum payback period. It is generally a subjective decision.  Inconsistent with shareholder value: Payback is not consistent with the objective
of maximising the market value of the firm's shares. Share values do not depend on
payback periods of investment projects.
Let us re-emphasize that the payback is not a valid method for evaluating the
acceptability of the investment projects. It can, however, be used along with the NPV
rule as a first step in roughly screening the projects. In practice, the use of DCF
techniques has been increasing but payback continues to remain a popular and primary
method of investment evaluation (Exhibit 2.1).
3.6.3 Payback Reciprocal and the Rate of Return
Payback is considered theoretically useful in a few situations. One significant argument
in favour of payback is that its reciprocal is a good approximation of the rate of return
under certain conditions.
Exhibit 2.1: Capital Budgeting Methods in Practice
 In a study of the capital budgeting practices of fourteen medium to large size
companies in India, it was found that all companies, except one, used
payback. With payback and/or other techniques, about two-thirds of
companies used IRR and about two-fifths NPV. IRR was found to be the
second most popular method.
 The reasons for the popularity of payback in order of significance were stated
to be its simplicity to use and understand its emphasis on the early recovery
of investment and focus on risk.
 It was also found that one-third of companies always insisted on the
computation of payback for all projects, one-third of its majority of projects
and remaining for some of the projects. For about two-thirds of company’s
standard payback ranged between 3 and 5 years.
 Reasons for the secondary role of DCF techniques in India included difficulty
in understanding and using these techniques, lack of qualified professionals
and unwillingness of top management to use DCF techniques. One large
manufacturing and marketing organisation mentioned that conditions of its
business were such mat DCF techniques were not needed. Yet another
company stated that replacement projects were very frequent in the company,
and it was not considered necessary to use DCF techniques for evaluating
such projects.
Source: Pandey, I.M., Capital Budgeting Practices of Indian Companies,
MDI Management Journal,Vol.2,No. I (Jan. 1989).
The payback period is defined as follows:
Payback = ( ) = (9)
The formula for the present value of an annuity is given by the following equation as
discussed in Unit 2. (i) in the original equation is being replaced by r, the internal rate of
return).
C0= C ( ) = −
( )
(10)
Multiplying both sides by r, we get
rC0 = C-C ( )
Solving for r, we find
r= −
( )
where C0 is the initial investment, C is annual cash inflow, r is rate of return and n is the
life of investment.
In Equation (10), the first right-hand term is the reciprocal of the payback period. The
second right-hand term is payback reciprocal multiplied by 1/(1 + r)n
. If n is very large or
extends to infinity, the second term becomes insignificant (almost equal to zero), and
we are left with the term C/C0. Thus, IRR is equal to the reciprocal of payback.
The reciprocal of payback will be a close approximation of the internal rate of return if
the following two conditions are satisfied:  The life of the project is large or at least twice the payback period.  The project generates equal annual cash inflows,
The payback reciprocal is a useful technique to quickly estimate the true rate of return.
But its major limitation is that every investment project does not satisfy the conditions on
which this method is based. When the useful life of the project is not at least twice the
payback period, the payback reciprocal will always exceed the rate of return. Similarly, it
cannot be used as an approximation of the rate of return if the project yields uneven
cash inflows.
3.6.4 Discounted Payback Period
One of the serious objections to the payback method is that it does not discount the
cash flows for calculating the payback period. We can discount cash flows and then
calculate the payback. The discounted payback period is the number of periods taken in
recovering the investment outlay on the present value basis. The discounted payback
period still fails to consider the cash flows occurring after the payback period.
Let us consider an example. Projects P and Q involve the same outlay of Rs 4,000
each. The opportunity cost of capital may be assumed as 10 per cent. The cash flows ill
the projects and their discounted payback periods are shown in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3 Discounted Payback Illustrated
Cash Flow (`)
Project C0 C1 C2 C3 C4 Simple
PB
Discounted
PB
NPV at
10%P -4000 3000 1000 1000 1000 2 years - - PV of cash flows -4000 2727 826 751 683 - 2.6 years 987
Q -4000 0 4000 1000 2000 2 years - - PV of cash flows -4000 0 3304 751 1366 2.9 years 1421
The projects are indicated of same desirability by the simple payback period. When
cash flows are discounted to calculate the discounted payback period, Project P
recovers the investment outlay faster than Project Q, and therefore, it would be
preferred over Project Q. Discounted payback period for a project will be always higher
than simple payback period because its calculation is based on the discounted cash
flows. Discounted payback rule is better as it discounts the cash flows until the outlay is
recovered. But it does not help much. It does not take into consideration the entire
aeries of cash flows. It can be seen in our example that if we use the NPV rule, Project
Q (with higher discounted payback period) is better.
3.7 ACCOUNTING RATE OF RETURN METHOD
The accounting rate of return (ARR), also known as the return on investment (ROI),
uses accounting information, as revealed by financial statements, to measure the
profitability of an investment. The accounting rate of return is the ratio of the average
after tax profit divided by the average investment. The average investment would be
equal to half of the original investment if it were depreciated constantly. Alternatively, it
can be found out by dividing the total of the investment's book values after depreciation
by the life of the project. The accounting rate of return, thus, is an average rate and can
be determined by the following equation:
ARR = (11)
In Equation (11) average income should be defined in terms of earnings after
taxes without an adjustment for interest viz. EBIT (1 - T) or net operating profit after tax.
Thus
ARR =
∑ ( )
(12)
where EBIT is earnings before interest and taxes, T tax rate, /0 book value of
investment in the beginning, /( book value of investment at the end of n number of
years.
Illustration 3.6: Accounting Rate of Return
A project will cost Rs 40,000. Its stream of earnings before depreciation, interest and
taxes (EBDIT) during first year through five years is expected to be Rs 10,000. Rs
12,000, Rs 14,000, Rs. 16,000 and Rs 20,000. Assume a 50 per cent tax rate and
depreciation on straight-line basis. Project's ARR is computed in Table 2.4.
Accounting Rate of Return = x 100 = 16 per cent
A variation of the ARR method is to divide average earnings after taxes by the original
cost of the project instead of the average cost. Thus, using this version, the ARR in
Illustration 2.6 would be: Rs 3,200  Rs 40.000 x 100 = 8 per cent. This version of the
ARR method is less consistent as earnings are averaged but investment is not.
Table 2.4 Calculation of Accounting Rate of Return
(`)Period 1 2 3 4 5 AverageEarnings before depreciation.
interest and taxes (EBDIT)
Depreciation
10,000
8,000
12,000
8,000
14,000
8,000
16,000
8,000
20,000
8,000
14,4008,000
Earnings before interest and
taxes (EB1T)
Taxes at 50%
2,000
1,000
4,000
2,000
6,000
3,000
8,000
4,000
12,000
6,000
6,400
3,200
Earnings before interest and
after taxes [EBIT (1-T)]
1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 6,000 3,200
Book value of investment:
Beginning
Ending
Average
40,000
32,000
36,000
32,000
24,000
28,000
24,000
16,000
20,000
16,000
8,000
12,000
8,000
-4,000 20,0003.7.1 Acceptance Rule
As an accept-or-reject criterion, this method will accept all those projects whose ARR is
higher than the minimum rate established by the management and reject those projects
which have ARR less than the minimum rate. This method would rank a project as
number one if it has highest ARR and lowest rank would be assigned to the project with
lowest ARR.
3.7.2 Evaluation of ARR Method
The ARR method may claim some merits:
 Simplicity: The ARR method is simple to understand and use. It does not involve
complicated computations.  Accounting data: The ARR can be readily calculated from the accounting data;
unlike in the NPV and IRR methods, no adjustments are required to arrive at cash
flows of the project.  Accounting profitability: The ARR rule incorporates the entire stream of income in
calculating the project's profitability.
The ARR is a method commonly understood by accountants, and frequently used as a
performance measure. As a decision criterion, however, it has serious shortcomings.  Cash flows ignored: The ARR method uses accounting profits, not cash flows, in
appraising the projects. Accounting profits arc based on arbitrary assumptions and
choices and also include non-cash items. It is, therefore, inappropriate to rely on
them for measuring the acceptability of the investment projects.  Time value ignored: The averaging of income ignores the time value of money. In
fact, this procedure gives more weightage to the distant receipts.  Arbitrary cut-off: The firm employing the ARR rule uses an arbitrary cut-off
yardstick. Generally, the yardstick is the firm's current return on its assets (book- value). Because of this, the growth companies earning very high rates on their
existing assets may reject profitable projects (i.e., with positive NPVs) and the less
profitable companies may accept bad projects (i.e.. with negative NPVs).
The ARR method continues to be used as a performance evaluation and control
measure in practice. But its use as an investment criterion is certainly undesirable. It
may lead to unprofitable allocation of capital.
3.8 SUMMARY
 Investments involve cash flows. The profitability of an investment project is
determined by evaluating its cash flows.  The capital budgeting process involves a process of facilitating decisions which
cover expenditures on long-term assets. They encompass both tangible and
intangible assets.  The phases of expenditure planning and control include identification of investment
opportunities, forecasting benefits and costs, authorization of capital expenditure
and control of capital projects.  NPV, IRR and PI are the discounted cash flow (DCF) criteria for appraising the worth
of an investment project.  The net present value (NPV) method is a process of calculating the present value of
a project's cash flows using the opportunity cost of capital as the discount rate, and
finding out the net present value by subtracting the initial Investment from the
present value of cash flows.  Under the NPV method, the investment project is accepted if its net present value is
positive (NPV > 0). The market value of the firm's share is expected 10 increase by
the project's positive NPV Between the mutually exclusive projects, the one with the
highest NPV will be chosen.
 The internal rate of return (ERR) is that discount rate at which the project's net
present value is zero. Under the IRR rule, the project will be accepted when its
internal rate of return is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (IRR > jfc).  I'B is the number of years required to recoup the initial cash outlay of an investment
project. The project would be accepted if it’s payback is less than the standard
payback. The greatest limitations of this method are that it does not consider the
time' value of money, and does not consider cash flows after the payback period.  Discounted payback considers the time value of money, but like simple payback, it
also ignores cash flows after the payback period. Under the conditions of constant
cash flows and the long life of a project, the reciprocal of payback can be a good
approximation of the project's rate of return.  Capital rationing is a situation where in a firm may be constrained by external or
internal reasons to obtain necessary funds to invest in all projects with positive NPV.  The cost of capital to a firm is the minimum return which the suppliers of capital
require. In other words, it is the price of obtaining capital; it is a compensation for
time and risk.  The cost of capital concept is of vital significance in financial decision making. It is
used: (a) as a discount, or cut-off, rate for evaluating investment projects, (6) for
designing the firm's debt-equity mix and (c) for appraising the top management's
financial performance.  Debt includes all interest-bearing borrowings. Its cost is the yield (return) which
lenders expect from their investment. In most cases, return is equal to the annual
contractual rate of interest (also called coupon rate). Interest charges are tax
deductible. Therefore, the cost of debt to the firm should be calculated after
adjusting for interest tax shield: where kd is before-tax cost of debt and T is the
corporate tax rate.  Equity includes paid-up capital and reserve and surplus (retained earnings). Equity
has no explicit cost, as payment of dividends is not obligatory. However, it involves
an opportunity cost.  Three steps are involved in calculating the firm's weighted average cost of capital
(WACC). First, the component costs of debt and equity are calculated. Second,
weights to each component of capital are assigned according to the target capital
structure. Third, the product of component costs and weights is summed up to
determine WACC. The weighted average cost of new capital is the weighted
marginal cost of capital (WMCC). WACC for a firm which debt and equity in the
capital structure, is given by the following formula:
where ke is the cost of equity, kd is the cost of debt, T is the tax rate, D is d and £ is
equity. The market value weights should be used in calculating WAC
3.9 KEY TERMS
 Capital Budget: The formal plan for the appropriation of funds is called capital
budget.  Payback: The number of years required to recover the original cash outlay
invested in a project.
 Accounting Rate of Return: ARR, also known as the return on investment
(ROI) uses accounting information as revealed by financial statements, measure
the profitability of an investment.  Internal Rate of Return Method: A discounted cash flow technique which takes
account of the magnitude and timing of cash flows.  Internal Rate of Return: The rate that equates the investment outlay with
present value of cash inflow received after one period.  Discounted Payback Period: The number of periods taken in recovering
investment outlay on the present value basis.
3.10 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRES” 1 A capital budgeting decision is a decision to invest the firm's funds most efficient
in anticipation of a projected flow of benefits (measured in cash flows) of number
of years in the future.
2 Long-term assets are those assets which affect a firm's operations beyond o
year.
3 A firm's long-term investment decisions would generally include expansion
acquisition, modernization and replacement of long-term assets. Sale of lot termassets is also considered an investment decision. Further, business decision
which have long-term implications like research and development programme
advertising campaigns, etc., should also be treated as investment decisions.
4 The reasons are as follows: (1) Growth: Investment decisions affect the firm's
growth in the long run. (2) Commitment of funds: Usually, in capital budgeting
decisions, large amounts of funds have to be committed. Once this large quantity
of funds is invested in long-term assets, the decision is irreversible, or reversible
at a substantial cost. (3) Risk: Given the nature of capital budgeting decision the
overall riskiness of the firm may also be considerably affected. (Complexities:
Finally, investment decisions are complex decisions, as so decisions have to
take into account a large number of factors which are uncertain and difficult to
predict. Economic, political, social and technological fact causes uncertainty in
future incomes.
5 The two main categories for assessment of capital budgeting decisions non- discounted cash flow criteria and discounted cash flow criteria. T discounted
cash flow techniques use cash flows and take into account the value of money.
The non-discounted cash flow criteria may measure benefit cither in cash flows
or non-cash flows terms but they not consider the time value of money.
6 The first step is to forecast on a realistic basis the cash flows of the proposed
project. The forecasted cash flows then should be discounted with the
appropriate discount rate, otherwise known as the cost of capital. The net
present value is then arrived at by subtracting the present value of cash outflows
from the present value of cash inflows. The project is acceptable if the net
present value is positive and rejected if the net present value is negative.
7 It is well-accepted that the best way to measure returns from a proposed project
is to estimate future cash flows. This avoids the ambiguities of different
accounting systems. The NPV method measures all cash flows occurring over
the entire life of the project. After the future cash flows are projected, the NPV
method discounts the cash flows with the cost of capital (or opportunity cost of
capital) which reflects the risks and missed opportunities in the financial market.
Hence the NPV method takes into account the time value of money and risk.
8 Finally, a project is found acceptable only if the net present value is positive, that
is the discounted cash inflows exceed the discounted cash outflows. This
approach is consistent with the objective of shareholder value maximization.
9 However, in spite of its obvious strengths, there are difficulties in using the NPV
method. First, it is not easy to forecast cash flows accurately. There are also
difficulties in arriving at the cost of capital or the discount rate that we use to
discount cash flows. In the case of alternative or mutually exclusive projects, a
project which yields a higher amount of NPV may also be more expensive to
implement. This means that a company with a funds constraint may prefer a
lower cost project. Finally, the ranking of investment projects are not independent
of the discount rates. This means that as the discount rate or cost of capital
changes, me ranking of projects may vary.
10 In this case, as in the NPV method, the projected cash flows of the project are
estimated on a realistic basis. IRR is the rate that equates the investment outlay
with me present value of the cash inflows. As the cash inflows from the proposed
project are uneven, the IRR has to be calculated by a trial and error method.
11 Under the IRR method, if we find that the calculated internal rate of return
exceeds the assumed opportunity cost of capital we accept the proposal;
otherwise we reject it. This minimum rate of return is sometimes known as the
cut-off or hurdle rate.
12 In the NPV method, the required rate of return is given, and this required rate of
return or cost of capital is used to calculate the present value of the projected
cash inflows, and hence the NPV of the project.
13 ARR is the ratio of average profit and average investment. It is calculated fromthe accounting data which is available from me projected financial statements of
the proposed project.
14 Payback is defined as the number of years required to recover the original cash
outlay invested in a project. It is very simple to calculate as we obtain i.e Payback
period of a project by the cash flows obtained on an annual basis.
15 The Payback system has serious limitations as it does not take into account the
time value of money. Further, it does not take into account the cash flows earned
after the payback period.
3.11 QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
Short-Answer Questions
1What is capital budgeting?. Describe its significant for a firm.
2 Despite its weaknesses, the payback period method is popular in practice. What
are the reasons for its popularity?.
3. How do you calculate the accounting rate of return? What are its limitations?
4. What is profitability index? Which is a superior ranking criterion, profitability index
or the net present value?
5. What are the limitations of Profitability Index in the capital budgeting process?
Long-Answer Questions
1Under what circumstances do the net present value and internal rate of return
methods differ? Which method would you prefer and why ?
2. Comment on the following statements:
a. '"We use payback primarily as a method of coping with risk."
b. "The virtue of the IRR rule is that it does not require the computation of the
required rate of return."
c. "The average accounting rate of return fails to give weight to the later cash
flows."
UNIT-3
DIVIDEND DECISIONS
STRUCTURE
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Objectives
4.2 Issues in Dividend Decisions
4.2.1 Dividend Decision and Valuation of the Firms
4.3 Walter's Model
4.3.1 Assumptions
4.3.2 Relation of Dividend Decision and Valuation of a Firm
4.3.3 Criticisms of Walter's Model
4.3.4 Implications of Walter's Model
4.4 Gordon's Model
4.5 Miller-Modigliani (MM) Hypothesis
4.6 Dividends and Uncertainty
4.7 Relevance of Dividend
4.7.1 Relevance under Market Imperfections
4.7.2 Uncertainty and Shareholders' Preference for Dividends
4.7.3 Transaction Costs and the Case against Dividend Payments
4.7.4 Information Asymmetry and Agency Costs and the Case for Dividend Payments
4.7.5 Tax Differential: Low-Payout and High-Payout Clientele
4.7.6 Neutrality of Dividend Policy: Black-Scholes Hypothesis
4.8 Dividend Policy in Practice
4.8.1 Firm's Investment Opportunities and Financial Needs
4.8.2 Shareholders' Expectations
4.8.3 Constraints on Paying Dividends
4.9 Stability of Dividends
4.10 Corporate Dividend Behaviour
4.11 Forms of Dividends
4.11.1 Cash Dividend
4.11.2 Bonus Shares
4.11.3 Advantages of Bonus Shares
4.11.4 Limitations of Bonus Shares
4.11.5 Conditions for the Issue of Bonus Shares
4.12 Questions and Exercises
4.0 INTRODUCTION
Dividend policy is the set of guidelines a company uses to decide how much of its
earnings it will pay out to shareholders. Some evidence suggests that investors are not
concerned with a company’s dividend policy since they can sell a portion of their
portfolio of equities if they want cash. The dividend decision of a firm is a crucial area of
financial management. The important aspect of dividend policy is to determine the
amount of earnings to be distributed to shareholders and the amount to be retained in
the firm. Retained earnings are the most important internal sources of financing the firm.
On the other hand, dividends may be considered desirable from shareholders' point of
view as they tend to increase their current return. There are three main approaches to dividends: residual, stability or a hybrid of the two.
Residual Dividend Policy
Companies using the residual dividend policy choose to rely on internally
generated equity to finance any new projects. As a result, dividend payments can come
out of the residual or leftover equity only after all project capital requirements are met.
These companies usually attempt to maintain balance in their debt/equity ratios before
making any dividend distributions, deciding on dividends only if there is enough money
left over after all operating and expansion expenses are met.
Typically, this method of dividend payment creates volatility in the dividend payments
that some investors find undesirable.
The residual-dividend model is based on three key pieces: an investment opportunity
schedule (IOS), a target capital structure and a cost of external capital.
1. The first step in the residual dividend model to set a target dividend payout ratio to
determine the optimal capital budget.
2. Then, management must determine the equity amount needed to finance the optimal
capital budget. This should be done primarily through retained earnings.
3. The dividends are then paid out with the leftover, or residual, earnings. Given the use
of residual earnings, the model is known as the "residual-dividend model."
A primary advantage of the dividend-residual model is that with capital-projects
budgeting, the residual-dividend model is useful in setting longer-term dividend policy. A
significant disadvantage is that dividends may be unstable. Earnings from year to year
can vary depending on business situations. As such, it is difficult to maintain stable
earnings and thus a stable dividend. While the residual-dividend model is useful for
longer-term planning, many firms do not use the model in calculating dividends each
quarter.
Dividend Stability Policy
The fluctuation of dividends created by the residual policy significantly contrasts with the
certainty of the dividend stability policy. With the stability policy, quarterly dividends are
set at a fraction of yearly earnings. This policy reduces uncertainty for investors and
provides them with income.
Hybrid Dividend Policy
The final approach is a combination between the residual and stable dividend policy.
Using this approach, companies tend to view the debt/equity ratio as a long-term rather
than a short-term goal. In today's markets, this approach is commonly used by
companies that pay dividends. As these companies will generally experience business
cycle fluctuations, they will generally have one set dividend, which is set as a relatively
small portion of yearly income and can be easily maintained. On top of this set dividend,
these companies will offer another extra dividend paid only when income exceeds
general levels.
4.1 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit, you will be able to: • Identify the issues in dividend decisions. • Explain the Walter's and Gordon's models of dividend policies. • Discuss the MM hypothesis. • Understand the relevance of dividends. • Explain the various forms of dividends. • Understand corporate dividend behavior. • Understand the meaning, significance and types of working capital. • Get an idea of the financing of current assets. • Understand the sources of working capital.
4.2 ISSUES IN DIVIDEND DECISIONS
In dividend decision, a financial manager is concerned to decide one or more of the
following: - Should the profits be ploughed back to finance the investment decisions?
- Whether any dividend be paid? If yes, how much dividend be paid?
- When these dividend be paid? Interim or final. - In what form the dividend be paid? Cash dividend or Bonus shares.
All these decisions are inter-related and have bearing on the future growth plans
of firm. If a firm pays dividend it affects the cash flow position of the firm but earns the
goodwill among investors who therefore may be willing to provide additional funds for
financing of investment plans of firm. On the other hand, the profits which are not
distributed as dividends become an easily available source of funds at no explicit costs.
However, in case of ploughing back of profits ,the firm may loose the goodwill
and confidence of the investors and may also defy the standards set by other firms.
Therefore, in taking dividend decision, the financial manager has to consider and
analyse various factors. Every aspects of dividend decision are to be critically
evaluated. The most important of these considerations is to decide as to what portion of
profit should be distributed which is also known as dividend payout ratio. A low payout policy might produce a higher share price because it accelerates
earnings growth. Investors of growth companies will realise their return mostly in the
form of capital gains. Dividend yield—dividend per share divided by the market price per
share—will be low for such companies. The impact of dividend policy on future capital
gains is, however, complex. Capital gains occur in distant future, and therefore, many
people consider them uncertain. It is not sure that low-payout policy will necessarily lead
to higher prices in reality. It is quite difficult to clearly identify the effect of payout on
share price. Share price is a reflection of so many factors that the long-run effect of
payout is quite difficult to isolate. A high payout policy means more current dividends
and less retained earnings, which may consequently result in slower growth and
perhaps lower market price per share. As stated earlier, low payout policy means less
current dividends, more retained earnings and higher capital gains and perhaps higher
market price per share. Capital gains are future earnings while dividends are current
earnings. Dividends in most countries are taxed more than capital gains.1 Therefore, it
is quite possible that some investors would prefer high-payout companies while others
may prefer low-payout companies
Table 4.1 Consequences of High and Low Payout Policies
Year Equity Earnings at
20%
Dividends Retained
Earnings
High Payout
Company 1
100.00 20.00 16.00 4.00
2 104.00 20.80 16.64 4.16
3 108.16 21.63 7.31 4.32
4 112.48 22.50 18.00 4.50
5 116.98 23.40 18.72 4.68
10 142.33 28.47 22.77 5.69
15 173.17 34.63 27.71 6.92
20 210.68 42.14 33.71 8.43
Low Payout
Company
1 100.00 20.00' 4.00 16.00
2 116.00 23.20 4.64 18.56
3 134.56 26.91 5.38 21.53
4 156.09 31.22 6.24 24.98
5 181.07 36.21 7.24 28.97
10 380.30 76.06 15.21 60.85
15 798.75 159.75 31.95 127.80
20 1,677.65 335.53 67.11 268.42
It may be seen from Table 4.1 that High Payout's dividend is initially four times that of
Low Payout's. However, over a long period of time, Low Payout overtake! High Payout's
dividend payments. As shown in Figure 4.1, in our example, fourteenth; year onwards
Low Payout's dividend exceeds that of High Payout. Note that Low| Payout retains
much more than High Payout, and as a consequence, High Payouts’ earnings,
dividends and equity investment are growing at 16 per cent while that the Low Payout's
at 4 per cent only.
4.2.1 Dividend Decision and Valuation of Firms
The value of the firm can be maximized if the shareholders wealth is maximized.
There are conflicting views regarding the impact of dividend decision on valuation of the
firm. According to one school of thought, dividend decision does not affect shareholders
wealth and hence the valuation of firm. On other hand, according to other school of
thought dividend decision materially affects the shareholders wealth and also valuation
of the firm. We have discussed below the views of two schools of thought under two
groups:
1. The Relevance Concept of Dividend a Theory of Relevance.
2. The Irrelevance Concept of Dividend or Theory of Irrelevance.
The Relevance Concept of Dividend
The advocates of this school of thought include Myron Gordon, James Walter
and Richardson. According to them dividends communicate information to the investors
about the firm’s profitability and hence dividend decision becomes relevant. Those firms
which pay higher dividends will have greater value as compared to those which do not
pay dividends or have a lower dividend pay out ratio. It holds that dividend decisions
affect value of the firm.
We have examined below two theories representing this notion: (i) Walter’s
Approach and (ii) Gordon’s Approach.
4.3 WALTER'S MODEL:
Professor James E. Walter argues that the choice of dividend policies almost always
affect the value of the firm. His model, one of the earlier theoretical works, shows the
importance of the relationship between the firm's rate of return, r, and its cost of capital,
k, in determining the dividend policy that will maximise the wealth of shareholders.
Walter's model is based on the following assumptions:
4.3.1 Assumptions of Walter’s model • Internal financing: All the investments are financed by the firm through retained
earnings. No new equity or debt is issued for the same.
• Constant return and cost of capital: The internal rate of return (r) and the cost
of capital (k) of the firm are constant. The business risks remain same for all
the investment decisions
•100 per cent payout or retention: All the earnings of the company are either
reinvested internally or distributed as dividends.
• Constant EPS and DIV: Beginning earnings and dividends of the firm never
change. Though different values of EPS and DPS may be used in the model, but they
are assumed to remain constant while determining a value.
• Infinite time: The firm has a very long or infinite life.
Walter’s formula for determining the value of share
P = D/K +{r(E-D)/K}/K
Where P = Market price per share
D = Dividend per share
r = internal rate of return
E = earnings per share
K = Cost of equity capital.
The above equation clearly reveals that the market price per share is the sum of
the present value of two sources of income:
i) The present value of an infinite stream of constant dividends, (D/K) and
ii) The present value of the infinite stream of stream gains.
4.3.2 .RELATION OF DIVIDEND DECISION AND VALUE OF A FIRM
According to Walter’s theory, the dividend payout in relation to (Internal Rate of Return)
‘r’ and (Cost of Capital) ‘k’ will impact the value of the firm in the following ways:
Relationship between
r and k
Increase in Dividend
Payout
Decrease in Dividend
Payout
r>k
Value of the firm decreases Value of the firm increases
r<k
Value of the firm increases Value of the firm decreases
r=k No change in the value of
the firm
No change in the value of
the firm
Illustration 4.1 A company has an EPS of Rs. 15. The market rate of discount
applicable to the company is 12.5%. Retained earnings can be reinvested at IRR of
10%. The company is paying out Rs.5 as a dividend.
Calculate the market price of the share using Walter’s model.
Here,
D = 5, E = 15, k = 12.5%, r = 10%
Market price of the share = P = 5/.125 + {.10 * (15-5)/.125} /.125 =Rs. 104
4.3.3 Criticism of Walter’s Model
Walter’s model has been criticized on account of various assumptions made by Prof
Walter in formulating his hypothesis.
(i) The basic assumption that investments are financed through retained
earnings only is seldom true in real world. Firms do raise fund by external
financing.
(ii) The internal rate of return i.e. r also does not remain constant. As a matter of
fact, with increased investment the rate of return also changes.
(iii) The assumption that cost of capital (k) will remain constant also does not
hold good. As a firm’s risk pattern does not remain constant, it is not proper to
assume that (k) will always remain constant.
(IV) No external financing: Walter's model of share valuation mixes dividend policy
with investment policy of the firm. The model assumes that retained earnings finance
the investment opportunities of the firm and no external financing—debt or equity—is
used for the purpose. When such a situation exists, either the firm's investment or its
dividend policy or both will be sub-optimum. This is shown graphically in Figure 4.2. The
horizontal axis represents the amount of earnings, investment and new financing in
rupees. The vertical axis shows the rates of return and the cost of capital. It is assumed
that the cost of capital, k, remains constant regardless of the amount of new capital
raised.
4.3.4 IMPLICATIONS OF WALTER’S MODEL
Walter’s model has important implications for firms in various levels of growth as
described below:
GROWTH FIRM
Growth firms are characterized by an internal rate of return > cost of the capital i.e. r >
k. These firms will have surplus profitable opportunities to invest. Because of this, the
firms in growth phase can earn more return for their shareholders in comparison to what
the shareholders can earn if they reinvested the dividends. Hence, for growth firms, the
optimum payout ratio is 0%.
NORMAL FIRM
Normal firms have an internal rate of return = cost of the capital i.e. r = k. The firms in
normal phase will make returns equal to that of a shareholder. Hence, the dividend
policy is of no relevance in such a scenario. It will have no influence on the market price
of the share. So, there is no optimum payout ratio for firms in the normal phase. Any
payout is optimum.
DECLINING FIRM
Declining firms have an internal rate of return < cost of the capital i.e. r < k. Declining
firms make returns that are less than what shareholders can make on their investments.
So, it is illogical to retain the company’s earnings. In fact, the best scenario to maximize
the price of the share is to distribute entire earnings to their shareholders. The optimumdividend payout ratio, in such situations, is 100%.
4.4 Gordon’s Approach : Another theory which contends that dividends are
relevant is Gordon’s model. This model which opinions that dividend policy of a firmaffects its value are based on following assumptions:- 1. The firm is an all equity firm. No external financing is used and
investment programmes are financed exclusively by retained earnings.
2. r and k are constant.
3. The firm has perpetual life.
4. The retention ratio, once decided upon, is constant. Thus, the growth
rate, (g=br) is also constant.
5. k >br
Gordon argues that the investors do have a preference for current dividends and
there is a direct relationship between the dividend policy and the market value of share.
He has built the model on basic premise that investors are basically risk averse and
they evaluate the future dividend/capital gains as a risky and uncertain proposition.
Investors are certain of receiving incomes from dividend than from future capital gains.
The incremental risk associated with capital gains implies a higher required rate of
return for discounting the capital gains than for discounting the current dividends. In
other words, an investor values current dividends more highly than an expected future
capital gain.
Hence, the “bird-in-hand” argument of this model suggests that dividend policy is
relevant, as investors prefer current dividends as against the future uncertain capital
gains. When investors are certain about their returns they discount the firm’s earnings at
lower rate and therefore placing a higher value for share and that of firm. So, the
investors require a higher rate of return as retention rate increases and this would
adversely affect share price.
Symbolically: -
Where Po = Market price of equity share
E = Earnings per share of firm.
b = Retention Ratio (1 – payout ratio)
r = Rate of Return on Investment of the firm.
K = Cost of equity share capital.
br = g i.e. growth rate of firm.
The Irrelevance Concept of Dividend
The other school of thought on dividend policy and valuation of the firm argues
that what a firm pays as dividends to share holders is irrelevant and the shareholders
are indifferent about receiving current dividend in future. The advocates of this school of
thought argue that dividend policy has no effect on market price of share. Two theories
have been discussed here to focus on irrelevance of dividend policy for valuation of the
firm which is as follows:
4.4.1 Residual’s Theory of Dividend
According to this theory, dividend decision has no effect on the wealth of
shareholders or the prices of the shares and hence it is irrelevant so far as valuation of
firm is concerned. This theory regards dividend decision merely as a part of financing
decision because earnings available may be retained in the business for re-investment.
But if the funds are not required in the business they may be distributed as dividends.
Thus, the decision to pay dividend or retain the earnings may be taken as residual
decision. This theory assumes that investors do not differentiate between dividends and
retentions by firm. Their basic desire is to earn higher return on their investment. In case
the firm has profitable opportunities giving higher rate of return than cost of retained
earnings, the investors would be content with the firm retaining the earnings to finance
the same. However, if the firm is not in a position to find profitable investment
opportunities, the investors would prefer to receive the earnings in the form of
dividends. Thus, a firm should retain earnings if it has profitable investment
opportunities otherwise it should pay them as dividends.
Under the Residuals theory, the firm would treat the dividend decision in three steps:
o Determining the level of capital expenditures which is determined by the investment
opportunities.
o Using the optimal financing mix, find out the amount of equity financing need to
support the capital expenditure in step (i) above
o As the cost of retained earnings kr
is less than the cost of new equity capital, the
retained earnings would be used to meet the equity portions financing in step (ii)
above. If available profits are more than this need, then the surplus may be
distributed as dividends of shareholder. As far as the required equity financing is in
excess of the amount of profits available, no dividends would be paid to the
shareholders.
Hence, in residual theory the dividend policy is influenced by (i) the company’s
investment opportunities and (ii) the availability of internally generated funds, where
dividends are paid only after all acceptable investment proposals have been financed.
The dividend policy is totally passive in nature and has no direct influence on the market
price of the share.
4.5 Modigliani and Miller Approach (MM Model)
Modigliani and Miller have expressed in the most comprehensive manner in
support of theory of irrelevance. They maintain that dividend policy has no effect on
market prices of shares and the value of firm is determined by earning capacity of the
firm or its investment policy. As observed by M.M, “Under conditions of perfect capital
markets, rational investors, absence of tax discrimination between dividend income and
capital appreciation, given the firm’s investment policy, its dividend policy may have no
influence on the market price of shares”. Even, the splitting of earnings between
retentions and dividends does not affect value of firm.
Assumptions of MM Hypothesis
(1) There are perfect capital markets.
(2) Investors behave rationally.
(3) Information about company is available to all without any cost.
(4) There are no floatation and transaction costs.
(5) The firm has a rigid investment policy.
(6) No investor is large enough to effect the market price of shares.
(7) There are either no taxes or there are no differences in tax rates applicable
to dividends and capital gains.
4.5.2 The Argument of MM
The argument given by MM in support of their hypothesis is that whatever increase in
value of the firm results from payment of dividend, will be exactly off set by achieve in
market price of shares because of external financing and there will be no change in total
wealth of the shareholders. For example, if a company, having investment opportunities
distributes all its earnings among the shareholders, it will have to raise additional funds
from external sources. This will result in increase in number of shares or payment of
interest charges, resulting in fall in earnings per share in future. Thus whatever a
shareholder gains on account of dividend payment is neutralized completely by the fall
in the market price of shares due to decline in expected future earnings per share. To
be more specific, the market price of share in beginning of period is equal to present
value of dividends paid at end of period plus the market price of shares at end of period
plus the market price of shares at end of the period. This can be put in form of following
formula:- P0 = D1 + P1
1 + Ke Where
PO = Market price per share at beginning of period.
D1 = Dividend to be received at end of period.
P1 = Market price per share at end of period.
Ke = Cost of equity capital.
The MM Hypothesis can be explained in another form also presuming that
investment required by the firm on account of payment of dividends is financed out of
the new issue of equity shares.
In such a case, the number of shares to be issued can be computed with the help
of the following equation:
The rate of return for a share held for one year may be calculated as follows:
Where P^ is the market or purchase price per share at time 0, P, is the market price per
share at time and D is dividend per share at time . As hypothesized by M – M, r should
be equal for all shares. If it is not so, the low-return yielding shares will be sold by
investors who will purchase the high-return yielding shares.
This process will tend to reduce the price of the low-return shares and to increase the
prices of the high-return shares. This switching will continue until the differentials in
rates of return are eliminated. This discount rate will also be equal for all firms under the
M-M assumption since there are no risk differences.
From the above M-M fundamental principle we can derive their valuation model as
follows:
Multiplying both sides of equation by the number of shares outstanding (n), we obtain
the value of the firm if no new financing exists.
If the firm sells m number of new shares at time 1 at a price of P^, the value of the firm
at time 0 will be
The above equation of M – M valuation allows for the issuance of new shares, unlike
Walter’s and Gordon’s models. Consequently, a firm can pay dividends and raise funds
to undertake the optimum investment policy. Thus, dividend and investment policies are
not confounded in M – M model, like waiter’s and Gordon’s models.
m = number of shares to be issued.
I = Investment required.
E = Total earnings of the firm during the period.
P1 = Market price per share at the end of the period.
Ke = Cost of equity capital.
n = number of shares outstanding at the beginning of the period.
D1 = Dividend to be paid at the end of the period.
nPO = Value of the firm.
This equation shows that dividends have no effect on the value of the firm when
external financing is used. Given the firm’s investment decision, the firm has two
alternatives, it can retain its earnings to finance the investments or it can distribute the
earnings to the shareholders as dividends and can arise an equal amount externally. If
the second alternative is preferred, it would involve arbitrage process. Arbitrage refers
to entering simultaneously into two transactions which exactly balance or completely
offset each other. Payment of dividends is associated with raising funds through other
means of financing. The effect of dividend payment on shareholder’s wealth will be
exactly offset by the effect of raising additional share capital. When dividends are paid
to the shareholder, the market price of the shares will increase. But the issue of
additional block of shares will cause a decline in the terminal value of shares. The
market price before and after the payment of the dividend would be identical. This
theory thus signifies that investors are indifferent about dividends and capital gains.
Their principal aim is to earn higher on investment. If a firm has investment
opportunities at hand promising higher rate of return than cost of capital, investor will be
inclined more towards retention. However, if the expected return is likely to be less than
what it would cost, they would be least interested in reinvestment of income. Modigiliani
and Miller are of the opinion that value of a firm is determined by earning potentiality
and investment policy and never by dividend decision.
4.5.3 Criticism of MM Approach
MM Hypothesis has been criticized on account of various unrealistic assumptions
as given below.
1. Perfect capital markets does not exist in reality.
2. Information about company is not available to all persons.
3. The firms have to incur floatation costs which issuing securities.
4. Taxes do exit and there is normally different tax treatment for dividends and
capital gains.
5. The firms do not follow rigid investment policy.
6. The investors have to pay brokerage, fees etc. which doing any transaction.
7. Shareholders may prefer current income as compared to further gains.
Illustration 4.2: Dividend Policy: Application of Walter's Model
To illustrate the effect of different dividend policies on the value of shares respectively
for the growth firm, normal firm and declining firm Table 4.2 is constructed.
Table 4.2 Dividend Policy and the Value of the Firm
Growth Firm, r>k Normal Firm, r = k
Basic Data
Declining Firm, r<k
r=0.15
k = 0.10
EPS, = Rs 10
r=0.10
k = 0.10
EPS, = Rs. 10
r=0.08
k = 0.10
EPS,=Rs.10
Payout Ratio 40%
Div=Rs.4 Div=Rs.4 Div=Rs.4
P={4+(0.15/0.10)(10- 4)}/0.10=Rs.130
P={4+(0.10/0.10)(10- 4)}/0.10=Rs.100
P={4+(0.08/0.10)(10- 4)}/0.10=Rs.188
Payout Ratio 80%
Div=Rs.8 Div=Rs.8 Div=Rs.8
P={8+(0.15/0.10)(10- 8)}/0.10=Rs.110
P={8+(0.10/0.10)(10- 8)}/0.10=Rs.100
P={8+(0..08/0.10)(10- 8)}/0.10=Rs.96
Payout Ratio 100%
Div=Rs.10 Div=Rs.10 Div=Rs.10
P={10+(0.15/0.10)(10- 10)}/0.10=Rs.100
P={10+(0.1/0.10)(10- 10)}/0.10=Rs.100
P={10+(0.08/0.10)(10- 10)}/0.10=Rs.100
Table 4.2 shows that, in Walter's model, the optimum dividend policy depends on the
relationship between the firm's rate of return, r and its cost of capital, k. Walter's view on
the optimum dividend-payout ratio is explained in the next section.
Illustration 4.3: ABC Ltd. belongs to a risk class for which the appropriate capitalization
rate is 10%. It currently has outstanding 5,000 shares selling at Rs.100 each. The firm is
contemplating the declaration of dividend of Rs.6 per share at the end of the current
financial year. The company expects to have net income of Rs.50,000 and has a
proposal for making new investments of Rs.1,00,000. Show that under the MMhypothesis, the payment of dividend does not affect the value of the firm.
Solution:
A. Value of the firm when dividends are paid:
(i) Price of the share at the end of the current financial year.
P1 = P0 (1 + Ke) – D1 = 100 (1 + 10) – 6 = 100 x 1.10 – 6 = 110 – 6 = Rs.104
B. Value of the firm when dividends are not paid:
(i) Price per share at the end of the current financial year
P1 = P0 (1 + ke) – D1 = 100 (1+.10)-0 = 100´1.10 = Rs. 110
Hence, whether dividends are paid or not, the value of the firm remains the same.
Illustration 4.4: Expandent Ltd. had 50,000 equity shares of Rs. 10 each outstanding
on January 1. The shares are currently being quoted at par the market. In the wake of
the removal of dividend restraint, the company now intends to pay a dividend of Rs. 2
per share for the current calendar year. It belongs to a risk-class whose appropriate
capitalization rate is 15%. Using MM model and assuming no taxes, ascertain the price
of the company's share as it is likely to prevail at the end of the year (i) when dividend is
declared, and (ii) when no dividend is declared. Also find out the number of new equity
shares that the company must issue to meet its investment needs of Rs. 2 lakhs,
assuming a net income of Rs. 1.1 lakhs and also assuming that the dividend is paid
Solution:
(i) Price as per share when dividends are paid
P1 = P0 (1+ke) – D1 = 10 (1+.15)-2 = 11.5-2 = Rs. 9.5.
(ii) Price per share when dividends are not paid:
P1 = P0 (1+ke)-D1 = 10 (1+. 15)-0 = Rs. 11.5
4.6 DIVIDENDS AND UNCERTAINTY
According to Gordon's model, dividend policy is irrelevant where r = k, when all other
assumptions are held valid. But when the simplifying assumptions are modified to
conform more closely to reality, Gordon concludes that dividend policy does affect the
value of a share even when r = k. This view is based on the assumption that under
conditions of uncertainty, investors tend to discount distant dividends (capital gains) at a
higher rate than they discount near dividends. Investors, behaving rationally, are risk- averse and, therefore, have a preference for near dividends to future dividends. The
logic underlying the dividend effect on the share value can be described as the bird-inthe-hand argument.
The typical investor would most certainly prefer to have his dividend today and let
tomorrow take care of it. No instances are in record in which the withholding of
dividends for the sake of future profits has been hailed with such enthusiasm as to
advance the price of the stock, the direct opposite has invariably been true. Given two
companies in the same general position and with the same earning power, the one
paying the larger dividend will always sell at a higher price.
Myron Gordon has expressed the bird-in-the-hand argument more convincingly and in
formal terms. According to him, uncertainty increases with futurity; that is the further one
looks into the future the more uncertain dividends become. Accordingly, when dividend
policy is considered in the context of uncertainty, the appropriate discount rate, k cannot
be assumed to be constant, in fact. it increases with uncertainty; investors prefer to
constant. In fact, it increases with uncertainty; investors prefer to avoid uncertainty and
would be willing to pay higher price for the share that pays the greater current dividend,
all other things held constant.
Table 4.3 Dividend Policy and the Value of the Firm
Growth Firm, r>k Normal Firm, r = k
Basic Data
Declining Firm, r<k
r=0.15
k = 0.10
EPS, = Rs 10
r=0.10
k = 0.10
EPS, = Rs. 10
r=0.08
k = 0.10
EPS,=Rs.10
Payout Ratio 40%
g = br= 0.6x0.15 = 0.09
p= 10(1-0.6)/( 0.10-0.09) =4/0.01 = Rs400
g = br = 0.6x0.10 = 0.06
p= 10(1-0.6) 0/(0.10-0.06) =4/0.04 = Rs100
g = br= 0.6x0.08 = 0.048
p= 10(1-0.6)/( 0.10 -0.048) = 4/0.052 =Rs77
Payout Ratio 60%
g = br= 0.4x0.15 = 0.06 * g=br = 0.4x0.10 = 0.04 g = br = 0.4x0.08 = 0.032
p= 10(1-0.4)/( 0.10-0.06) =6/0.04 = Rs150
p= 10(1-0.4)/( 0.10-0.04) =6/0.06 = Rs100
p= 10(1-0.4)/( 0.10-0.032) =6/0.068 = Rs88
Payout Ratio 90%
g = br= 0.10x0.15 = 0.015 S = br=0.10x0.l0 = 0.01 g = br = 0.10x0.08 = 0.008
p= 10(1-0.1)/( 0.10-0.015) =9/0.085 = Rs106
p= 10(1-0.1)/( 0.10-0.01) =9/0.09 = Rs100
p= 10(1-0.1)/( 0.10-0.008) =9/0.092 = Rs98
Illustration 4.3: Dividend Irrelevance: The Miller-Modigliani Hypothesis
The HCL Limited currently has 2 crore outstanding shares selling at a market price of
Rs. 100 per share. The firm has no borrowing. It has internal funds available to make a
capital expenditure (capex) of Rs. 30 crore. The capex is expected to yield a positive
net present value of Rs. 20 crore. The firm also wants to pay a dividend per share of Rs.
15. Given the firm's capex plan and its policy of zero borrowing, the firm will have to
issue new shares to finance payment of dividends to its shareholders. How will the
firm's value be affected (i) if it does not pay any dividend; (ii) if it pays dividend per share
Rs. 15Rs.
The firm's current value is: 2 x 100 = Rs. 200 crore. After the capex, the value will
Increase to: 200 + 20 = Rs. 220 crore. If the firm does not pay dividends, me value per
share will be: 220/2 = Rs. 110.
If the firm pays a dividend of Rs. 15 per share, it will entirely utilise its internal funds
(15x2 = Rs. 30 crore), and it will have to raise Rs. 30 crore by issuing new shares lo
undertake capex. The value of a share after paying dividend will be: 110 - 15 = X 95.
Thus, the existing shareholders get cash of f 15 per share in the form of dividends, but
incur a capital loss of Rs. 15 in the form of reduced share value. They neither gain nor
lose. The firm will have to issue: 30 crore/95 = 31,57,895 (about 31.6 lakh) share to
raise Rs. 30 crore. The firm now has 2.316 crore shares at Rs. 95 each share. Thus, dfl
value of the firm remains as: 2.316 x 95 = Rs. 220 crore.
Illustration 4.4: Dividend Policy with and without Issue of Shares
The Bright Engineering Co. Ltd., currently has one lakh outstanding shares selling at
100 each. The firm has net profits of Rs. 10 lakh and wants to make new investments of
Rs. 20 lakh during the period. The firm is also thinking of declaring a dividend of Rs. 5
per share at the end of the current fiscal year. The firm's opportunity cost of capital is 10
per cent. What will be the price of the share at the end of the year if (i) a dividend is not
declared; (ii) a dividend is declared. (iii) How many new shares must be issued
The price of the share at the end of the current fiscal year is determined as follows:
P0 = D1 + P1
1 + Ke Or the value of P1 = P0( 1 + Ke )-D1=Rs100(1.10)-0=Rs 110
The value of P1 when dividend is paid is: Rs100(1.10)- Rs 5=Rs 105
It can be observed that whether dividend is paid or not the wealth of shareholders
remains the same. When the dividend is not paid the shareholder will get f 110 by way
of the price per share at the end of the current fiscal year. On the other hand, when
dividend is paid, the shareholder will realise Rs. 105
by way of the price per share at the end of the
current fiscal year plus Rs. 5 as dividend.
4.7 RELEVANCE OF DIVIDEND
4.7.1 Relevance under Market Imperfections
The assumptions underlying MM's hypothesis may
not always be found valid in practice. For example,
we may not find capital markets to be perfect in
reality; there may exist issue costs; dividends may
be taxed differently than capital gains; investors may encounter difficulties in selling
their shares. Because of the unrealistic nature of the assumptions, MM's hypothesis is
alleged to lack practical relevance. This suggests that internal financing and external
financing are not equivalent. Dividend policy of the firm may affect the perception of
shareholders and, therefore, they may not remain indifferent between dividends and
capital gains. The following are the situations where the MM hypothesis may go wrong.
4.7.2 Uncertainty and Shareholders' Preference for Dividends
. It is suggested that dividends resolve uncertainty in the minds of investors and,
therefore, they prefer dividends than capital gains. As explained earlier, Gordon and
others have referred to the argument that dividends are relevant under uncertainty as
the bird-in-the-hand argument. Gordon asserts that uncertainty increases with the
length of time period. Investors are risk-averters and, therefore, prefer near dividends to
future dividends. Thus, future dividends are discounted at a higher rate than near
dividends. This implies that the discount rate increases with uncertainty. As a result, a
Check Your Progress
1. What is the most important aspect of
dividend management?
2 What are the basic assumptions of
Walter's model?
3. What is meant by arbitrage?
4. What does the MM hypothesis
hold?
firm paying dividends earlier will command a higher value than a firm which follows a
policy of retention. This view implies that there exists a high-payout clientele who value
shares of dividend paying more than those which do not pay dividends.
Yet another reason for shareholders preferring current dividends maybe their desire to
diversify their portfolios according to their risk preferences. Hence, they would like firms
to distribute earnings. They will be able to invest dividends received in other assets
keeping in mind their need for diversification. Under these circumstances, investors may
discount the value of the firms that use internal financing.
4.7.3 Transaction Costs and the Case against Dividend Payments
In MM hypothesis it is argued that internal financing (retained earnings) and external
financing (issue of shares) are equivalent. This implies that when firms pay dividends,
they can finance their investment plans by issuing shares. Whether the firm retains
earnings or issues new shares, the wealth of shareholders would remain unaffected.
This cannot be true since the issue of shares involve flotation or issue costs, including
costs of preparing and issuing prospectus, underwriting fee, brokers' commission etc.
No flotation costs are involved if the earnings are retained. The presence of flotation or
transaction costs makes the external financing costlier than the internal financing via
retained earnings. In practice, dividend decisions seem to be sticky for whatever
reasons. Companies continue paying same dividends, rather increasing it, unless
earnings decline, in spite of need for funds. Under the MM hypothesis, the wealth of a
shareholder will be same whether the firm pays dividends or not. If a shareholder is not
paid dividends and he desires to have current income, he can sell the shares held by
him. When the shareholder sells his shares to satisfy his desire for current income, he
will have to pay brokerage fee. This fee is more for small sales. Some emerging
markets are not very liquid. And many shares are not frequently traded. Because of the
transactions costs and inconvenience associated with the sale of shares to realise
capital gains, shareholders may prefer dividends to capital gains.
4.7.4 Information Asymmetry and Agency Costs and the
Case for Dividend Payments
In practice managers may not share complete information with shareholders. This gap
between information available with managers and what is actually shared with
shareholders is called information asymmetry. This leads to several agency problems,
viz., conflicts between managers and shareholders. Managers may not have enough
incentive to disclose full information to shareholders. They may act in their own selfinterest and take away the firm's wealth in the form of non-pecuniary benefits.
Shareholders incur agency costs to obtain full information about a company's
investment plans, future earnings, expected dividend payments etc. The shareholders- managers conflict can be reduced through monitoring which includes bonding contracts
and limiting the power of managers vis-a-vis allocation of wealth and managerial
compensation. However, monitoring involves costs that are referred to as agency costs.
The high-payout policy of a company helps to reduce the conflict arising out of
information asymmetry." It is argued that companies which pay high dividends regularly
may be raising capital more frequently from the primary markets. Therefore, the actors
in primary markets like the financial institutions and banks would be monitoring the
performance of these companies. If the professionals in the banks and financial
institutions continuously do such monitoring, shareholders need not incur monitoring
(agency) costs.
4.7.5 Tax Differential: Low-Payout and High-Payout Clientele
Investors have to pay taxes on dividends and capital gains. But different tax rates are
applicable to dividends and capital gains. Dividend income is generally treated as the
ordinary income, while capital gains are specially treated for tax purposes. In most
countries, the "capital gains rate is lower than the marginal tax rate for ordinary income.
From the tax point of view, a shareholder in high tax bracket should prefer capital gains
over current dividends i.e. for two reasons: (i) the capital gains tax is less than the tax
on dividends, and (ii) the Capital gains tax is payable only when the shares are actually
sold . Consider an example. Two identical firms A and B have different dividend policy.
Both have after tax profit, P of Rs. 100, A pays 100 per cent dividend. B does not pay
any dividend and shareholders get capital gains. Assume further that capital gains fromshares held at least for one year are taxed at 20 per cent and marginal income tax rate
is 40 per cent. Suppose B’s shareholders are in highest tax bracket and pay tax on
dividend income at 40 per cent, A’s shareholders will receive dividends of Rs. 100 and
their after tax dividend income will be: 100 x (1 - 0.40) = Rs. 60. B’s shareholders will
realize capital gains of Rs. 100 and their after tax capital gains will be: 100 x (1 - 0.20) =
is Rs. 80. B’s shareholders are better off as they have tax advantage. Since the after tax
equity income of B’s shareholders is higher than A’*s shareholders and since both firms
are identical in all other respects, B’s equity price will be higher.
If a tax system favours capital gains to dividend income, there may still be several
investors who are in lower tax brackets. These investors investing in shares will prefer
dividend income rather capital gains. Thus, there may exit high-payout clientele. India is
an exception where dividends are not taxed but capital gains are. In most countries, tax
systems favour capital gains with no or low tax rates as compared to dividends. Thus,
the preference for low-payout or high-payout shares will depend on the tax status of the
individual investors. (See Exhibit 4.1 for the different tax schedule regarding dividends
and capital gains.)
Exhibit 4.1: Taxes and Dividends
Shareholders' earnings are taxed differently in different countries. We can identify the
following four tax systems regarding the taxation of shareholders' earnings: • Double taxation: Under this system, shareholders' earnings are taxed twice; first
the corporate tax is levied on profits at the level of the company! and then, the after¬tax
profits distributed as dividends are taxed as ordinary income in the hands of
shareholders. Most countries have a higher marginal tax rate for dividend income tiian
capital gains. The wealthy shareholders with high personal tax rates will prefer capital
gains to dividends. A number of countries such as USA follow the double (or two-tier)
taxation system. India practised this system until the change in the tax laws in 1997. • Single taxation: Under this system, shareholders' earnings are taxed only once at
the corporate level. Dividends received by shareholders are exempt from tax. India
currently follows this system. Companies in India pay tax on their profits at 35 per cent,
and tiiey will have to pay additional tax at 12.5 per cent on the after-tax profits
distributed as dividends to shareholders. Shareholders, born individuals and corporate,
do not pay taxes on the dividend income. However, they do pay tax on short-termcapital gains. The marginal personal rate is 30 per cent and short-term capital gain tax
rate is 10 per cent. Under this system, all investors will prefer dividends and long-termcapital gains
• Split-rate taxation: Under this system, corporate profits are divided into retained
earnings and dividends for the purpose of taxation. A higher tax rate is applied to
retained earnings and a lower rate to earnings distributed as dividends. Shareholders
pay tax on dividends and capital gains. This system, but for a lower tax rate on dividend,
is similar to double taxation system. Tax-exempt and low-tax paying shareholders would
prefer dividends while shareholders in high tax brackets will prefer capital gains. • Imputation taxation: Under this system, shareholders' earnings are not subjected
to double taxation. A company pays corporate tax on its earnings. Shareholders pay
personal taxes on dividends but get full or partial tax relief for the tax paid by the
company. In Australia, shareholders get full tax relief while in Canada they get partial
relief. Under full tax relief, a tax-exempt shareholder or a shareholder, who has a
personal tax rate lower than the corporate tax rate, will get a tax refund.
4.7.6 Neutrality of Dividend Policy: Biack-Scholes Hypothesis
Black and Scholes argued that shareholders trade off the benefits of dividends against
the tax loss. Based on the trade offs of the shareholders, they are classified into three
types (i) one that considers dividends are always good;( ii) secondly that considers
dividends are always bad; and (iii) thirdly that is indifferent to dividends. Shareholders in
high tax brackets may belong to high-payout clientele since in their case the tax
disadvantage may outweigh the benefits of dividends. On the other hand, shareholders
in low tax brackets may fit in to low-payout clientele , they may suffer marginal tax
disadvantage of dividends. Tax-exempt investors’ are indifferent to dividends and
capital gains, as they pay no taxes on their incomes
4.8 DIVIDEND POLICY IN PRACTICE
The main consideration in determining the dividend policy is the objective of
maximization of wealth of shareholders. Thus, a firm should retain earnings if it has
profitable opportunities, giving a higher rate of return than cost of retained earnings,
otherwise it should pay them as dividends. It implies that a firm should treat retained
earnings as the active decision variable, and dividends as the passive residual.
In actual practice, however, we find that most firms determine the amount of
dividends first, as an active decision variable, and the residue constitutes the retained
earnings. In fact, there is no choice with the companies between paying dividends and
not paying dividends. Most of the companies believe that by following a stable dividend
policy with a high payout ratio, they can maximize the market value of shares.
Moreover, the image of such companies also improved on the market and the investors
also favour such companies. The firms following this policy, can thus successfully
approach the market for raising additional funds for future expansion and growth, as
and when required. It has therefore, been rightly said that theoretically retained earnings
should be treated as the active decision variable and dividends as passive residual but
practice does not conform to this in most cases.
There are a very few exceptions to the practice of paying high dividends and
continuously increasing dividends. The Chairman and Managing Director of the Great
Eastern Shipping Company Limited, is in favour of not paying any dividends.
Deliberating on the company's dividend policy in his 1992-93 Chairman's Statement, he
stated:
...” We do not intend to maintain dividends as a percentage of the face value of your
share, nor do we intend to maintain dividend at a fixed rupee value.... it is our intention
to retain as much profit as we possibly can, ideally we should like to retain all our
earnings, we certainly believe that to be in the shareholders' interest, ... payment of
dividends is an inefficient way of increasing shareholders' wealth. That, had we been a
new company the most sensible policy may well have been to pay no dividends and
accumulate our profits. This is a policy followed by the most successful companies in
the world. We have been inhibited in doing so by tradition and conventional wisdom. .”.. The following questions relate to the dividend policy of a firm: • What are the firm's financial needs given its growth plans and investment
opportunities?
• Who are the firm's shareholders and what are their preferences with regard to
dividend payments?
• What are the firm's business risks?
• What are the firm's constraints-financial and legal-in paying dividends?
• Is control a consideration for the firm?
• Should the firm follow a stable dividend policy?
• How should the firm pay dividends—cash dividend or bonus shares or shares
buyback?
It is not easy to answer these questions. A number of factors will have to be evaluated
to analyse each of these questions to evolve a long-term dividend policy for the firmwhich are discussed below.
4.8.1 Firm’s requirement for Investments and Other Financial Needs
Firms have to consider the future investment projects while deciding about the dividend
policies. If the future demands saving for long term projects, it is better to retain
earnings rather than distributing the dividends. In case firms distribute its earnings in
form of dividends to the shareholders, it will have to raise funds externally and spend
floatation costs. In practice, the firms follow this policy of retention of profits. Thus,
priority should be to given to retention of earnings over dividends payments. It also
depends on the types of firms – Growth firms have large number of investment projects
which require them to keep the earnings to be utilized for the same whereas for mature
firms the investment projects are few. Hence, these firms can distribute easily to the
shareholders. It requires that a firm should have a target payout ratio which matches
with the availability of future investment projects. Sometimes, companies’ capital
structures are also laden with debts which require financial obligations in the form of
principal and interest payments. Such financial needs also force companies to plan for a
payout which meets the needs of the shareholders and debt holders. Therefore,
dividend policy is very much dependent on the companies’ long term financial needs..
Firms should tailor their dividend policies to their long-term investment opportunities to
have maximum financial flexibility and avoid financial frictions and costs of raising
external funds. Generally, retained earnings should be used as a source of internal
financing only when a company has profitable investment opportunities. If shareholders
themselves have better investment opportunities, the earnings should be distributed to
them so that they may be able to maximise their wealth. Theoretically, when the
company has an internal rate of return greater than the return required by shareholders,
it would be to the advantage of shareholders to allow the reinvestment of earnings by
the company. When the company does not have highly profitable opportunities and
earns a rate on investment, which is lower than the rate required by shareholders, it is
not in the interest of shareholders to retain earnings.
4.8.2 Shareholders' Expectations
The shareholders have diverse views when it comes to holding shares of a company.
There are investors who are interested in capital gains while some want a steady flow of
dividends. The reasons are age factor, risk appetite, financial needs, etc. of the
investors. A retired elderly investor may prefer for a steady source of income whereas a
young investor having a higher risk appetite may be interested in holding a stock for
long term in the expectations of high capital gains. Sometimes, the investors plan their
portfolios to plan their tax expenses as well. Institutional investors and retail investors
too differ when an investing into dividend yielding stocks and stocks yielding capital
gains. Therefore, the companies have to consider the conflicting interests of investors
preferring capital gains as well as dividends. Also once a dividend policy is put into
place; it should be not changed immediately. This can have a negative impact on the
shareholders preferring dividends whereby they can shift their preferences to stocks of
other companies giving better dividends. Legally, the board of directors has discretion to
decide the distribution of the earnings of a company. Shareholders are the legal owners
of the company, and directors, appointed by them are their agents. Therefore, directors
should give due importance to the expectations of shareholders in the matter of
dividend decision. Shareholders' preference for dividends or capital gains may depend
on their economic status and the effect of tax differential' on dividends and capital gains.
In most countries, dividend income is taxed at a rate higher than the capital gains.
4.8.3 Constraints on Paying Dividends
Companies have to undergo various constraints while deciding over their dividend
policy which include liquidity, legal pressures etc. The following are the constraints that
companies face:
Liquidity: There is a difference between liquidity and profitability. If the cash flows of
the companies are restricted, it will not be able to pay dividends even if it is having very
high earnings. This situation is mostly faced by growth companies which enjoy reap in
earnings but their liquidity position is tight as their cash is blocked in investment
projects. Similarly, the mature companies having lesser investment plans in hand have
cash flows available which can be distributed for paying dividends.
Capital Market: Access to capital market is an important consideration when it comes to
deciding dividend policy. Companies with higher cash flows and earnings with a track
record are able to raise easily capital from the capital market and hence can pay
dividends easily whereas it is vice versa for the firms with tightened liquidity and lower
earnings. Also capital market is dependent on overall market conditions like political
conditions, world market, etc.
Inflationary conditions: During the times of inflation, the dividend payout is low. The
reason is that the depreciation sinking fund is not sufficient to fund the new equipments
available at high costs. Inflation can act as a constraint on paying dividends. Our
accounting system is based on historical costs. Depreciation is charged on the basis of
original costs at which assets were acquired. As a result, when prices rise, funds equal
to depreciation set aside would not be adequate to replace assets or to maintain the
capital intact. Consequently, to maintain the capital intact and preserve their earnings
power, firms’ earnings may avoid paying dividends.
Financial Leverage: Leverage refers to the amount of debt in the capital structure. If a
firm is highly levered with lower profitability, then it is obliged to pay interest and
principal amount to the debt holders before preference shareholders and equity
shareholders. On the other hand, highly profitable firms even though highly levered can
pay dividends easily to its shareholders.
Legal Restrictions: Companies have to follow legalities before declaring dividends. For
example, in India dividend should be paid after providing for depreciation. Also theThe
legal rules act as boundaries within which a company can operate in terms of paying
dividends. Acting within these boundaries, a company will have to consider many
financial variables and constraints in deciding the amount of earnings to be distributed
as dividends. Dividends should be paid in cash. Dividends cannot be declared for past
year for which the accounts have been closed.
Dilution of Ownership: Shareholders do have concerns over their control over their
company. If a company pays dividend, then the firm raises funds by issuing new shares
as the cash flow reduces. But it adds to the new shareholder base resulting in dilution of
ownership if the existing shareholders don’t buy the new shares. In such situations, the
company prefers that the dividend payment be avoided and investment plans be
financed through existing cash flows only. Financial condition and borrowing capacity: The financial condition or capability of a
firm depends on its use of borrowings and interest charges payable. A high degree of
financial leverage makes a company quite vulnerable to changes in earnings, and also,
it becomes quite difficult to raise funds externally for financing its growth. A highly
levered firm is, therefore, expected to retain more to strengthen its equity base.
However, a company with steady growing earnings and cash flows and without much
investment opportunities may follow a high dividend payment policy in spite of high
amount of debt in its capital structure. A growth firm lacking liquidity may borrow to pay
dividends. But this is not a sound policy. This will adversely affect the firm's financial
flexibility. Financial flexibility includes the firm's ability to access external funds at a later
date. The firm may lose the flexibility and capacity of raising external funds to finance
growth opportunities in the future.
Restrictions in loan agreements: Lenders may generally put restrictions on dividend
payments to protect their interests when the firm is experiencing low liquidity or low
profitability. As such, the firm agrees as part of a contract with a lender to restrict
dividend payments. For example, a loan agreement may prohibit payment of dividends
as long as the firm's debt-equity ratio is in excess of, say, 1.5:1 or when the liquidity
ratio is less than, say, 2:1 or may require the firm to pay dividends only when some
amount of current earnings has been transferred to a sinking fund established to retire
debt. These are some of the examples of the restrictions put by lenders on the payment
of dividends. When these restrictions are put, the company is forced to retain earnings
and have a low payout.
Control: The objective of maintaining control over the company by the existing
management group or the body of shareholders can be an important variable in
influencing the company's dividend policy. When a company pays large dividends, its
cash position is affected. As a result, the company will have to issue new shares to
raise funds to finance its investment programmes. The control of the existing
shareholders will be diluted if they do not want or cannot buy additional shares. Under
these circumstances the payment of dividends may be withheld and earnings may be
retained to finance the firm's investment opportunities.
4.9 STABILITY OF DIVIDENDS
Stability of dividends is the most desirable policy favored by companies and investors. It
instills confidence in the shareholders to stay invested in the company and has a
positive impact on the market price. Stability of dividends means regularity in payment
of dividends even though there might be fluctuations in the earnings. There are
following ways by which firms can maintain stability of dividends
• Constant dividend per share or dividend rate
• Constant Dividend Payout
• and Stable Dividend Plus Extra Dividend
Before understanding the above terms, we should first know the justification behind
dividend stability.
# Investors’ needs for current income: There is a class of investors which always
prefer dividends over capital gains. The reason is that stable dividends act as current
income for them like wages and salaries. These investors include retired, elderly
people, widows, etc. For such investors, the expenses remain more or less constant
over a time frame. Thus, they prefer the dividend stream should match their expense
stream also. In case, the dividend policy changes, they may sell their shares and they
have to bear transaction costs. This situation is quite inconvenient to them. Also such
investors are ready to pay higher price for dividend paying stocks to avoid the
inconveniences of selling the shares.
# Resolves Investors’ uncertainty: Dividend decision conveys a good amount of
information in the minds of investors. An increase in dividend payment signifies
optimistic picture of firm’s financial position whereas a decrease in dividends may be
perceived as downfall in the future earnings prospects. An erratic dividend policy does
not give any information about the company rather investors feel that the company’s
future is not bright enough. This kind of policy has a negative impact on the market price
of its share. Firms should ideally vary dividends gradually when they expect changes in
long term prospects.
# Raising Additional Finances: Stability of dividends ensures that a firm will be able
to raise additional finance whenever it needs. The reason is that it has provided
assurance and confidence to the investors community as they believe that investment in
such a company will not result in speculation rather will prove a quality investment. Also
a small investor looks forward to issues of such companies due to the reason that they
want to supplement their income by stable dividend payments. Even issues of
preference shares and debentures of such companies are also favored as the
subscribers may feel that if the company is able to satisfy the current needs of the
ordinary shareholders, undoubtedly, their interest and principal obligation will be done
on time.
# Requirements of Institutional Investors: Institutional investors prefer to invest in
companies which have a track record of paying stable dividends. Such investors include
financial institutions (LIC, IDBI, UTI, etc.), educational and social institutions. The
plausible rationale behind such investment is availability of huge amount of funds with
them. Therefore, a stable dividend policy is followed by firms to get funds and satisfy the
needs of institutional investors.
On the other hand, a stable dividend policy has drawbacks too. Once a stable dividend
policy is set, it cannot be reversed. It tends to have an impact on the investors’ attitudes.
With a stable dividend policy, the firm is able to create a clientele who prefers dividend
and they remain invested in the company. Whereas a dividend cut tends to give a
negative impression about a company’s financial prospects and the investors may pull
out principal amount from the company. Thus, that is the reasoning behind maintaining
a stable dividend policy. The solution can be to keep a dividend rate at a conservative
figure. The other way out could be to provide extra dividends to signal an improvement
in company’s earnings. Even if the extra dividends are not paid regularly the investor
will not mind but an instance of nonpayment of regular dividends brings a pessimistic
reactions.
#Constant dividend per share or dividend rate
As per this policy, the firms pay dividends as a percentage of paid up capital. This can
be referred as Dividend per share. This kind of policy is followed by Indian companies
whereby companies pay a fixed rate on paid up capital as dividend every year. For
instance, the face value of XYZ Ltd. is Rs 10 and the dividend fixed is Rs 2. So, this
amount has to be paid irrespective of fluctuations of earnings. So such policy becomes
a drawback for companies especially if their earnings tend to fluctuate. Such companies
have to keep provisions from profits for payment of dividends in lean times. This
provision is called Dividend Equalization Reserve. This reserve is invested in
marketable securities and assets which can be easily converted into cash in times of
need. Constant dividend per share does not mean that the dividend is fixed all the
times. This can increase with the increase in earnings. Such a dividend policy is favored
by investors who prefer current income.
The earnings per share and the dividend per share relationship under this policy is
shown in Figure 4.3.
#Constant Dividend Payout ratio
Constant Dividend Payout ratio Policy Payout ratio means ratio of dividend to earnings.
In the policy of constant payout, the firms tend to pay a fixed percentage of earnings to
the shareholders. In this sense, the dividend payments are dependent on the earnings
pattern. If earnings of the firm increase, the dividends automatically increase and vice- versa. Firms are able to internally finance themselves with such a policy. The liquidity of
the firms is not affected by employing such a policy. The ratio of dividend to earnings is
known as payout ratio. Some companies may follow a policy of constant payout ratio,
i.e., paying a fixed percentage of net earnings every year. With this policy the amount of
dividend will fluctuate indirect proportion to ratio, then 40 per cent of every earnings. If
a company adopts a 40 percent payout if the company earns Rs. 2 per rupee of net
earnings will be paid out. For example, share, the dividend per share will be Re 0.80
and if it earns X 1.50 per share the dividend per share will be Re 0.60. The relation
between the earnings per share and the dividend per share under this policy is exhibited
in Figure4.4. .
Merits of Stability of Dividends
The stability of dividends has several advantages as discussed below: • Resolution of investors' uncertainty. • Investors' desire for current income. • Institutional investors' requirements. • Raising additional finances.
Resolution of investors' uncertainty: We have argued in the previous chapter that
dividends have informational value, and resolve uncertainty in the minds of investors.
When a company follows a policy of stable dividends, it will not change the amount of
dividends if mere are temporary changes in its earnings. Thus, when the earnings of a
company fall and it continues to pay same amount of dividend as in the past, it conveys
to investors that the future of the company is brighter than suggested by the drop in
earnings. Similarly, the amount of dividends is increased with increased earnings level
only when it is possible to maintain it in future. On the other hand, if a company follows
a policy of changing dividends with cyclical changes in the earnings, shareholders
would not be certain about the amount of dividends.
Investors' desire for current income: There are many investors, such as old and retired
persons, women etc., who desire to receive regular periodic income. They •nvest their
savings in the shares with a view to use dividends as a source of income to meet their
living expenses. Dividends are like wages and salaries for them. These investors will
prefer a company with stable dividends to the one with fluctuating dividends.
Institutional investors' requirements: Financial, educational and social institutions and
unit trusts also invest funds in shares of companies. In India, financial institutions such
as IFCI, IDBI, LIC, and UTI are some of the largest investors in corporate securities.
Every company is interested to have these financial institutions in the list of their
investors. These institutions may generally invest in the shares of those companies,
which have a record of paying regular dividends. These institutional investors may not
prefer a company, which has a history of adopting an erratic dividend policy. Thus, to
cater the requirement of institutional investors, a company prefers to follow a stable
dividend policy.
Raising additional finances: A stable dividend policy is also advantageous to the
company in its efforts to raise external finances. Stable and regular dividend policy
tends to make the share of a company as quality investment rather than a speculation.
Investors purchasing these shares intend to hold them for long periods of time. The
loyalty and goodwill of shareholders towards a company increases with stable dividend
policy. They would be more receptive to an offer by the company for further issues of
shares. A history of stable dividends serves to spread ownership of outstanding shares
more widely among small investors, and thereby reduces the chance of loss of control.
The persons with small means, in the hope of supplementing their income, usually
purchase shares of the companies with a history of paying regular dividends. A stable
dividend policy also helps the sale of debentures and preference shares. The fact that
the company has been paying dividend regularly in the past is a sufficient assurance to
the purchasers of these securities that no default will be made by the company in
paying their interest or preference dividend and returning the principal sum. The
financial
4.10 CORPORATE DIVIDEND BEHAVIOUR
We have discussed stability of dividends in terms of stable dividends per share (or
djvidend rate) and stable payout ratio. A stable payout ratio results into fluctuating
dividend per share pattern, which could be a cause of uncertainty for investors. In
practice, firms express their dividend policy either in terms of dividend per share or
dividend rate. Does this mean that payout ratio is not considered important by firms
while determining their dividend policies?. One of the central issues of corporate finance
has been the dividend decision of a firm, which has always been studied in relation to a
firm’s financing and investment decisions. The association amongst these two decisions
has posed various questions. How much should a firm pay as dividend? How does a
dividend payout policy influence the valuation of a firm? Does a firm’s decision to
distribute cash correspond to its financing and investing decisions? What is the outcome
of changes in the dividend policy assuming steady financing and investment decisions
of a firm? Research has attempted to provide answers to these questions and many
more but mystery still shrouds the dividend decision. Lintner (1956) argues that firms of
developed markets target their dividend payout ratio with the help of current earnings
and past dividends. In order to reach such target, various adjustments are made in the
dividend policy of a firm and therefore firms should have stable dividend policies. Miller
and Modigliani (1961) on the other hand feel that dividend policy is irrelevant in
measuring the current worth of shares considering the irrational assumptions of market
perfections, zero transaction costs, perfect certainty and indifferent behaviour of
investors. However, Miller and Scholes (1982) argue that in the real world, dividend
decision is inspired more by high taxes on dividends than capital gains and market
imperfections.
4.11 FORMS OF DIVIDENDS
The usual practice is to pay dividends in cash. Other options are payment of tin-bonus
shares (referred to as stock dividend in USA) and shares buyback. In this section, we
shall also discuss share split. The share (stock) split is not a form of dividend; but its
effects are similar to the effects of the bonus shares.
4.11.1 Cash Dividend
Companies mostly pay dividends in cash. A company should have enough cash in its
bank account when cash dividends are declared. If it does not have enough bank
balance, arrangement should be made to borrow funds. When the company follows I
stable dividend policy, it should prepare a cash budget for the coming period to indicate
the necessary funds, which would be needed to meet the regular dividend payment of
the company. It is relatively difficult to make cash planning in anticipation of dividend
needs when an unstable policy is followed.
The cash account and the reserves account of a company will be reduced when the
cash dividend is paid. Thus, both the total assets and the net worth of the company are
reduced when the cash dividend is distributed. The market price of the share drops in
most cases by the amount of the cash dividend distributed.
4.11.2 Bonus Shares
An issue of bonus shares is the distribution of shares free of cost to the existing share
holders. In India, bonus shares are issued in addition to the cash dividend and not in
lieu of cash dividend. Hence companies in India may supplement cash dividend by
bonus issues. Issuing bonus shares increases the number of outstanding shares of the
Company. The bonus shares are distributed proportionately to the existing shareholder.
Hence there is no dilution of ownership. For example, if a shareholder owns 100 shares
at the time when a 10 per cent (i.e., 1:10) bonus issue is made, she will receive 10
additional shares. The declaration of the bonus shares will increase the paid-up share
capital and reduce the reserves and surplus (retained earnings) of the company. The
total net worth (paid-up capital plus reserves and surplus) is not affected by the bonus
issue. In fact, a bonus issue represents a recapitalisation of reserves and surplus. It is
merely an accounting transfer from reserves and surplus to paid-up capital.
4.11.3 Advantages of Bonus Shares
Prima facie the bonus shares do not affect the wealth of the shareholders. In practice,
however, it carries certain advantages both for shareholders and the company.
Shareholders: The following are advantages of the bonus shares to shareholders:
Tax benefit: One of the advantages to shareholders in the receipt of bonus shares is the
beneficial treatment of such dividends with regard to income taxes. When a shareholder
receives cash dividend from company, this is included in his ordinary income and taxed
at ordinary income tax rate. But the receipt of bonus shares by the shareholder is not
taxable as income. Further, the shareholder can sell the new shares received by way of
the bonus issue to satisfy his desire for income and pay capital gain taxes, which are
usually less than the income taxes on the cash dividends. The shareholder could sell a
few shares of his original holding to derive capital gains. But selling the original shares
are considered as a sale of asset by some shareholders. They do not mind selling the
shares received by way of the bonus shares as they consider it a windfall gain and not a
part of the principal. Note that in India as per the current law investors do not pay any
taxes on dividends but they have to pay tax on capital gains. Hence, the Indian law
makes bonus shares less attractive than dividends.
Indication of higher future profits: The issue of bonus shares is normally interpreted by
shareholders as an indication of higher profitability. When the profits of a company do
not rise, and it declares a bonus issue, the company will experience a dilution of
earnings as a result of the additional shares outstanding. Since a dilution of earnings is
not desirable, directors usually declare bonus shares only when they expect rise in
earnings to offset the additional outstanding shares. Bonus shares, thus, may convey
some information that may have a favourable impact on value of the shares. But it
should be noticed that the impact on value is that of the growth expectation and not the
bonus shares per se.
Future dividends may increase: If a company has been following a policy of paying a
fixed amount of dividend per share and continues it after the declaration of the bonus
issue, the total cash dividends of the shareholders will increase in the future. For
example, a company may be paying a Re 1 dividend per share and pays 1:1 bonus
shares with the announcement that the cash dividend per share will remain unchanged.
If a shareholder originally held 100 shares, he will receive additional 100 shares. His
total cash dividend in future will be Rs. 200 (Rs. 1 x 200) instead of X 100 (X 1 x 100)
received in the past. The increase in the shareholders' cash dividend may have a
favourable effect on the value of the share. It should be, however, realised that the
bonus issue per share has no effect on the value of the share; it is the increase in
earnings from the company's investments that affects the value.
Psychological value: The declaration of the bonus issue may have a favourable
psychological effect on shareholders. The receipt of bonus shares gives them a chance
to sell the shares to make capital gains without impairing their principal investment.
They also associate it with the prosperity of the company. Because of these positive
expects of the bonus issue, the market usually receives it positively. The sale of the
shares, received by way of the bonus shares, by some shareholders widens the
distribution of the company's shares. This tends to increase the market interest in the
company's shares; thus supporting or raising its market price.
Company: The bonus share is also advantageous to the company. The advantages
are:
Conservation of cash: The declaration of a bonus issue allows the company to declare l
dividend without using up cash that may be needed to finance me profitable investment
opportunities within the company. The company is, thus, able to retain earnings and at
the same time satisfy the desires of shareholders to receive dividend. We have stated
earlier that directors of a company must consider the financial needs of the company
and the desires of shareholders while making the dividend decision. These two
objectives are often in conflict. The use of bonus issue represents a compromise which
enables directors to achieve both these objectives of a dividend policy.
Only means to pay dividend under financial difficulty and contractual restrictions:
In some situations, even if the company's intention is not to retain earnings, the bonus
issue (with a small amount of dividend) is the only means to pay dividends and satisfy
the desires of shareholders. When a company is facing a stringent cash situation, the
only way to replace or reduce cash dividend is the issue of bonus shares. The
declaration of the bonus issue under such a situation should not convey a message of
the company's profitability, but financial difficulty. The declaration of the bonus issue is
also necessitated when the restrictions to pay the cash dividend are put under loan
agreements. Thus, under the situations of financial stringency or contractual constrain in
paying cash dividend, the bonus issue is meant to maintain the confidence of
shareholders in the company.
More attractive share price: Sometimes the intention of a company in issuing bonus
shares is to reduce the market price of the share and make it more attractive to
investors. If the market price of a company's share is very high, it may not appeal to
small investors. If the price could be brought down to a desired range, the trading
activity would increase. Therefore, the bonus issue is used as a means to keep the
market price of the share within a desired trading range. As we shall discuss below, this
objective can also be achieved by share split.
4.11.4 Limitations of Bonus Shares
Bonus shares have the following limitations:
Shareholders' wealth remains unaffected
• Costly to administer • Problem of adjusting EPS and P/E ratio
Bonus shares are considered valuable by most shareholders. But they fail to! realise
that the bonus shares do not affect their wealth and therefore, in itself it has no value for
them. The declaration of bonus shares is a method of capitalising the past earnings of
the shareholders. Thus, it is a formal way of recognising something (earnings), which
the shareholders already own. It merely divides the ownership of the company into a
large number of share certificates. Bonus shares represent simply a division of
corporate pie into a large number of pieces. In fact, the bonus issue does not give any
extra or special benefit to a shareholder. His proportionate ownership in the company
does not change. The chief advantage of the bonus share issue is that it has a
favourable psychological impact on shareholders. The issue of bonus shares | gives an
indication of the company's growth to shareholders. Shareholders welcome the
distribution of bonus shares since it has informational value.
4.12. QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
Short-Answer Questions
1 Explain the Modigliani-Miller hypothesis of dividend irrelevance. Does this dividend
irrelevance. Does this hypothesis suffer from deficiencies?
2 How far do you agree that dividends are irrelevant?
3 In Walter’s Approach, the dividend policy of firm depends on availability of
investment opportunity and relationship between firm’s internal rate of return and its
cost of capital. Discuss what are shortcomings of this view?
4. What are the essentials of Walter's dividend model? Explain its shortcomings
5. Discuss different sources of working capital.
6. What is a stable dividend policy?. Why should it be followed?. What can be the
consequences of changing a stable dividend policy?.
Long-Answer Questions
1. How is the corporate dividend behaviour determined ? Explain Lintner's model in this
regard. 2. The following information is available in respect of a firm:
Capitalisation rate = 10%
Earnings per share = Rs. 50
Assumed rate of return on investments:
(i) 12%
(ii) 8%
(iii) 10%
Show the effect of dividend policy on market price of shares applying Walter's formula
when dividend pay out ratio is (a) 0% (b) 20%, (c) 40%, (d) 80%, and (e) 100%
3. The earnings per share of company are Rs. 8 and the rate of capitalisation
applicable to the company is 10%. The company has before it an option of adopting a
payout ratio of 25% or 50% or 75%. Using Walter's formula of dividend payout, compute
the market value of the company's share if the productivity of retained earnings is (i)
15% (ii) 10% and (iii) 5%
4. The earnings per share of a share of the face value of Rs.100 to PQR Ltd. is
Rs.20. It has a rate of return of 25%. Capitalisation rate of its risk class is 12.5%. If
Walter's model is used:
a) What should be the optimum payout ratio?
b) What should be the market price per share if the payout ratio is zero?
c) Suppose, the company has a payout of 25% of EPS, what would be the price per
share?
5. Determine the market value of equity shares of the company from the following
information:
Earnings of the company Rs.5,00,000
Dividend paid 3,00,000
Number of shares outstanding 1,00,000
Price-earning ratio 8
Rate of return on investment 15%
6. The earnings per share (EPS) of a company is Rs.10. It has an internal rate of return
of 15% and the capitalization rate of its risk class is 12.5%. If Walter's Model is used –
(i) What should be the optimum payout ratio of the company?
(ii) What would be the price of the share at this payout?
(iii) How shall the price of the share be affected, if a different payout were
employed?
7. From the following information supplied to you, ascertain whether the firm is following
an optimal dividend policy as per Walter's model?
Total Earnings Rs.2,00,000
Number of equity shares (of Rs.100 each) 20,000
Dividend paid 1,50,000
Price/Earning ratio 12.5
The firm is expected to maintain its rate of return on fresh investment. Also find
out what should be the P/E ratio at which the dividend policy will have no effect on the
value of the share?
8. A company has total investment of Rs.5,00,000 assets and 50,000 outstanding
equity shares of Rs.10 each. It earns a rate of 15% on its investments, and has a policy
of retaining 50% of the earnings. If the appropriate discount rate for the firm is 10%,
determine the price of its share using Gordon Model. What shall happen to the price, if
the company has a payout of 80% or 20%.
9. Assuming that rate of return expected by investor is 11%; internal rate of
return is 12%; and earnings per share are Rs.15, calculate price per share by 'Gordon
Approach' method if dividend payout ratio is 10% and 30%.
10. Textrol Ltd. has 80,000 shares outstanding. The current market price of
these shares is Rs.15 each. The company expect a net profit of Rs.2,40,000 during the
year and it belongs to a risk-class for which the appropriate capitalisation rate has been
estimated to be 20%. The Company is considering dividend of Rs.2 per share for the
current year.
a) What will be the price of the share at the end of the year (i) if the dividend is paid
and (ii) if the dividend is not paid?
(b) How many new shares must the Co. issue if the dividend is paid and the Co.
needs Rs.5,60,000 for an approved investment expenditure during the
year? Use MM model for the calculation