4.0 INTRODUCTION:
You may not talk about working capital every day, but this accounting term may hold the
key to your company’s success. Working capital affects many aspects of your business,
from paying your employees and vendors to keeping the lights on and planning for
sustainable long-term growth. In short, working capital is the money available to meet
your current, short-term obligations. To make sure your working capital works for you,
you’ll need to calculate your current levels, project your future needs and consider ways
to make sure you always have enough cash. Working capital (abbreviated WC) is a
financial metric which represents operating liquidity available to a business,
organization, or other entity, including governmental entities. Along with fixed assets
such as plant and equipment, working capital is considered a part of operating capital.
Gross working capital is equal to current assets. Working capital is calculated as current
assets minus current liabilities.[1] If current assets are less than current liabilities, an
entity has a working capital deficiency, also called a working capital deficit and Negative
Working capital. A company can be endowed with assets and profitability but may fall
short of liquidity if its assets cannot be readily converted into cash. Positive working
capital is required to ensure that a firm is able to continue its operations and that it has
sufficient funds to satisfy both maturing short-term debt and upcoming operational
expenses. The management of working capital involves managing inventories, accounts
receivable and payable, and cash.
4.1 REQUIREMENT OF WORKING CAPITAL AND FINANCING
The management of current assets is similar to that of fixed assets in the sense that in
both cases a firm analyses their effects on its return and risk. The management of fixed
and current assets, however, differs in three important ways: First, in managing fixed
assets, time is a very important factor; consequently, discounting and compounding
techniques play a significant role in capital budgeting and a minor one in the
management of current assets. Second, the large holding of current assets, especially
cash, Strengthens the firm's liquidity position (and reduces riskiness), but also reduces
the overall profitability. Thus, a risk-return trade off is involved in holding current assets.
Third, levels of fixed as well as current assets depend upon expected sales, but it is
only current assets which can be adjusted with sales, fluctuations in the short run. Thus,
the firm has a greater degree of flexibility in managing current assets. The two main
sources of working capital are trade credit and bank borrowing. Commercial paper is
another important source of short-term funds.
4.1.1. Meaning and Types of Working Capital
There are two concepts of working capital—gross and net.
• Gross working capital refers to the firm's investment in current assets, Current
assets are the assets which can be converted into cash within an accounting year and
include cash, short-term securities, debtors, (accounts receivable or book debts) bills
receivable and stock (inventory). • Net working capital refers to the difference between current assets and current
liabilities. Current liabilities are those claims of outsiders which are expected to mature
for payment within an accounting year and include creditors (accounts payable), bills
payable, and outstanding expenses. Net working capital can be positive or negative. A
positive net working capital will arise when current assets exceed current liabilities. A
negative net working capital occurs when current liabilities are in excess of current
assets.
4.1.2 Importance or Advantages of Adequate Working Capital : Working capital is
the life blood and nerve centre of a business. Hence, it is very essential to maintain
smooth running of a business. No business can run successfully without an adequate
amount of working capital. The main advantages of maintaining adequate amount of
working capital are as follows:
1. Solvency of the Business: Adequate working capital helps in maintaining
solvency of business by providing uninterrupted flow of production.
2. Goodwill: Sufficient working capital enables a business concern to make
prompt payments and hence helps in creating and maintaining goodwill.
3. Easy Loans: A concern having adequate working capital, high solvency and
good credit standing can arrange loans from banks and others on easy and
favourable terms.
4. Cash Discounts: Adequate working capital also enables a concern to avail
cash discounts on purchases and hence it reduces cost.
5. Regular Supply of Raw Material: Sufficient working capital ensure regular
supply of raw materials and continuous production.
6. Regular payment of salaries, wages and other day to
day commitments: A company which has ample working capital can make
regular payment of salaries, wages and other day to day commitments which
raises morale of its employees, increases their efficiency, reduces costs and
wastages.
7. Ability to face crisis: Adequate working capital enables a concern to face
business crisis in emergencies such as depression.
8. Quick and regular return on investments: Every investor wants a quick and
regular return on his investments. Sufficiency of working capital enables a concern
to pay quick and regular dividends to is investor as there may not be much
pressure to plough back profits which gains the confidence of investors and
creates a favourable market to raise additional funds in future.
9. Exploitation of Favourable market conditions: Only concerns with
adequate working capital can exploit favourable market conditions such as
purchasing its requirements in bulk when the prices are lower and by holding its
inventories for higher prices.
10. High Morale: Adequacy of working capital creates an environment of security,
confidence, high morale and creates overall efficiency in a business.
4.1.3 Factors Determing the Working Capital Requirements
The following are important factors which influence working capital requirements:
1. Nature or Character of Business: The working capital requirements of
firm depend upon nature of its business. Public utility undertakings like
electricity, water supply need very limited working capital because they offer
cash sales only and supply services, not products, and such no funds are tied
up in inventories and receivables whereas trading and financial firms require
less investment in fixed assets but have to invest large amounts in current
assets and as such they need large amount of working capital. Manufacturing
undertaking require sizeable working capital between these two.
2. Size of Business/Scale of Operations: Greater the size of a business
unit, larger will be requirement of working capital and vice-versa.
3. Production Policy: The requirements of working capital depend upon
production policy. If the policy is to keep production steady by accumulating
inventories it will require higher working capital. The production could be kept
either steady by accumulating inventories during slack periods with view to
meet high demand during peak season or production could be curtailed during
slack season and increased during peak season.
4. Manufacturing process / Length of Production cycle: Longer the
process period of manufacture, larger is the amount of working capital
required. The longer the manufacturing time, the raw materials and other
supplies have to be carried for longer period in the process with progressive
increment of labour and service costs before finished product is finally
obtained. Therefore, if there are alternative processes of production, the
process with the shortest production period should be chosen.
5. Credit Policy: A concern that purchases its requirements on credit and
sell its products/services on cash requires lesser amount of working capital.
On other hand a concern buying its requirements for cash and allowing credit
to its customers, shall need larger amount of working capital as very huge
amount of funds are bound to be tied up in debtors or bills receivables.
6. Business Cycles: In period of boom i.e. when business is prosperous,
there is need for larger amount of working capital due to increase in sales, rise
in prices etc. On contrary in times of depression the business contracts, sales
decline, difficulties are faced in collections from debtors and firms may have
large amount of working capital lying idle.
7. Rate of Growth of Business: The working capital requirements of a
concern increase with growth and expansion of its business activities. In fast
growing concerns large amount of working capital is required whereas in
normal rate of expansion in the volume of business the firm may have retained
profits to provide for more working capital.
8. Earning Capacity and Dividend Policy. The firms with high earning
capacity generate cash profits from operations and contribute to working
capital. The dividend policy of concern also influences the requirements of its
working capital. A firm that maintains a steady high rate of cash dividend
irrespective of its generation of profits need more working capital than firm that
retains larger part of its profits and does not pay so high rate of cash dividend.
9. Price Level Changes: Changes in price level affect the working capital
requirements. Generally, the rising prices will require the firm to maintain large
amount of working capital as more funds will be required to maintain the same
current assets. The effect of rising prices may be different for different firms.
10. Working Capital Cycle: In a manufacturing concern, the working capital
cycle starts with the purchase of raw material and ends with realisation of cash
from the sale of finished products. This cycle involves purchase of raw
materials and stores, its conversion into stocks of finished goods through work
in progress with progressive increment of labour and service costs, conversion
of finished stock into sales, debtors and receivables and ultimately realisation
of cash and this cycle again from cash to purchase of raw material and so
on. The speed with which the working capital completes one cycle determines
the requirements of working capital longer the period of cycle larger is
requirement of working capital.
4.1 .4 Focusing on management of current assets
The gross working capital concept focuses attention on two aspects of current assets!
Management: (1) How to optimize investment in current assets? (2) How should current
assets be financed?
Investment in current assets should be just adequate to the needs of the business firm.
Excessive investment in current assets should be avoided because it impairs the firm's
profitability, as idle investment earns nothing. On the other hand, inadequate amount of
working capital can threaten solvency of the firm because of its inability to meet its
current obligations. It should be realised that the working capital needs of the firm may
be| fluctuating with changing business activity. This may cause excess or shortage in
working capital frequently. The management should be prompt to initiate an action and
correct imbalances.
Another aspect of the gross working capital points to the need of arranging funds to
finance current assets. Whenever a need for working capital funds arises due to the
increasing level of business activity or for any other reason, financing arrangement |
should be made quickly. Similarly, if suddenly, some surplus funds arise they should not
be allowed to remain idle, but should be invested in short-term securities. Thus, that
financial manager should have knowledge of the sources of working capital funds as
well as investment avenues where idle funds may be temporarily invested.
4.1 .5 Focusing on liquidity management
Net working capital is a qualitative concept. It indicates the liquidity position of the firmand suggests the extent to which working capital needs may be financed by permanent
sources of funds. It is a conventional rule to maintain the level of current assets twice
the level of current liabilities. However, the quality of current assets should be
considered in determining the level of current assets vis-a-vis current liabilities. A weak
liquidity position poses a threat to the solvency of the company and makes it unsafe and
unsound. A negative working capital means a negative liquidity- and may prove to be
harmful for the company's reputation. Excessive liquidity is also bad. It may be due to
mismanagement of current assets. Therefore, prompt and timely action should be taken
by management to improve and correct the imbalances in the liquidity position of the
firm.
Net working capital concept also covers the question of judicious mix of long-term and
short-term funds for financing current assets. For every firm, there is a minimum amount
of net working capital which is permanent. Therefore, a portion of the working capital
should be financed with the permanent sources of funds such as equity share capital,
debentures, long-term debt, preference share capital or retained earnings. Management
must, therefore, decide the extent to which current assets should be financed with
equity capital and/or borrowed capital.
In summary, it may be emphasised that both gross and net concepts of working capital
are equally important for the efficient management of working capital. There is no
precise way to determine the exact amount of gross or net working capital for any firm.
4.1.6 Permanent and Variable Working Capital
We know that the need for current assets arises because of the operating cycle. The
operating cycle is a continuous process and, therefore, the need for current assets is
felt constantly. But the magnitude of current assets needed is not always the same; it
increases and decreases over time. However, there is always a minimum level of
current assets which is continuously required by a firm to carry on its business
operations. Permanent or fixed, working capital is the minimum level of current assets. It
is permanent in the same way as the firm's fixed assets are. Depending upon the
changes in production and sales, the need for working capital, over and above
permanent working capital, will fluctuate. For example, extra inventory of finished goods
will have to be maintained to support the peak periods of sale, and investment in
debtors (receivable) may also increase during such periods. On the other hand,
investment in raw material, work-in-process and finished goods will fall if the market is
slack.
Fluctuating or variable working capital is the extra working capital needed to support the
changing production and sales activities of the firm. Both kinds of working capital—permanent and fluctuating (temporary)—are necessary to facilitate production and sale
through the operating cycle. But the firm to meet liquidity requirements that will last only
temporarily creates the temporary working capital. Figure 4.5 illustrates differences
between permanent and temporary working capital. It is shown that permanent working
capital is stable over time, while temporary working capital is fluctuating—sometimes
increasing and sometimes decreasing. However, the permanent working capital line
need not be horizontal if the firm's requirement for permanent capital is increasing (or
decreasing) over a period. For a growing firm, the difference between permanent and
temporary working capital can be depicted through Figure 4.6.
4.2 CALCULATING OPERATING CYCLE PERIOD AND ESTIMATING WORKING
CAPITAL NEEDS
The most appropriate method of calculating the working capital needs of a firm is the
concept of operating cycle. However, a number of other methods may be used to
determine working capital needs in practice. We shall illustrate here three approaches
which have been successfully applied in practice: • Current assets holding period: To estimate working capital requirements on the
basis of average holding period of current assets and relating them to costs based on
the company's experience in the previous years. This method is essentially based on
the operating cycle concept. • Ratio of sales: To estimate working capital requirements as a ratio of sales on
the assumption that current assets change with sales. • Ratio affixed investment: To estimate working capital requirements as a
percentage of fixed investment.
.
Example4.1. From the following projects of PQR
Ltd. for the coming year, you are asked to determine the working capital needs of the
company.
Annuals Sales: Rs. 15,60,000
Cost of production (including depreciation of Rs. 1,30,000): Rs.12,50,000
Raw material purchases: Rs.7,00,000
Opening Stock of raw materials: Rs. 1,50,000
Closing stock of raw materials: Rs. 1,30,000
Inventory Norms:
Raw materials: 2 months
Work-in-process: 1/2 month
Finished goods: 1 month
The firm enjoys credit of 1 month on its purchases and also extends credit of 1 month
on its supplier. It may be assumed that production is carried out evenly. Cash balance
of the year and the minimum cash balance to be maintained is Rs. 50,000.
Check Your Progress
7. Differentiate between
permanent and variable working
capital.
8. What are the main methods for
estimating working capital needs?
Solution: Determination of net working capital
(i)Current Assets:
Cash Balance (Rs.) 50,000
Inventories:
Raw materials :
Opening Stock Rs. 1,50,000
Add: Purchase Rs. 7,00,000
Less: Closing Stock Rs. 130,000
----------------- Annual Consumption Rs 7,20,000
Two months' requirement (7,20,000 x 2/12) 120,000
Work-in-process (l 1,20,000 x 1/24) 46,667
Finished goods (11,20,000 x 1/12) 93,333
Debtors (11,20,000x1/12) 93,333
----------- Total Current Assets Rs 4,,03,333
(II) Current liabilities:
Trade creditors (7,00,000 x 1/12) 58333
--------------
(iii) Net working capital (I - II) Rs. 3,45,000
Note: Depreciation is excluded from the cost of production.
Example 4.2: Walmart Stores Inc. provides all about inventories. Find its operating
cycle assuming all sales are (a) cash sales and (b) credit sales. You can use cost of
revenue as approximate figure for purchases (i.e. no need to adjust it for changes in
inventories). Rs.
Revenue 4,69,162
Cost of revenue 3,52,488
Inventories as at 31 January 2013 43,803
Inventories as at 31 January 2012 40,714
Average inventories 42,259
Accounts receivable as at 31 January 2013 6,768
Accounts receivable as at 31 January 2012 5,937
Average accounts receivable 6,353
Solution
Part (a)
Days taken in converting inventories to accounts receivable = 365/352,488*42,259 =
43.75
Since there are no credit sales, time taken in recovering cash from accounts receivable
is zero. Customers pay cash right away.
Operating cycle is 43.75 days and this represents the time taken in selling inventories.
Part (b)
There is no change in days taken in converting inventories to accounts receivable.
Days taken in converting receivables to cash = 365/469,162*6,353 = 4.92
Operating cycle = days taken in selling + days taken in recovering cash = 43.75 + 4.92
= 48.68
Example 4.3. XYZ Ltd. has obtained the following data concerning the average working
capital cycle for other companies in the same industry :
Raw material stock turnover 20 Days
Credit received 40 Days
Work-in-Progress Turnover 15 Days
Finished goods stock turnover 40 Days
Debtors' collection period 60 Days
95 Days
Using the following data, calculate the current working capital cycle for XYZ Ltd. And
briefly comment on it.
(Rs. in '000)
Sales 3,000
Cost of Production 2,100
Purchase 600
Average raw material stock 80
Average work-in-progress 85
Average finished goods stock 180
Average creditors 90
Average debtors 350
Solution: Operating cycle of XYZ Ltd. 1. Raw material = 49 Days
2. Work-in-progress = 15Days
3. Finished Goods = 31 Days
4. Debtors = 43 Days
5. Creditors = 55 Days
Net Operating Cycle = 49 days + 15 days + 31 days + 43 days – 55 days
= 138 Days – 55 Days = 83 Days
Comment : For XYZ Ltd., the working capital cycle is below the industry average,
including a lower investment in net current assets. However, the following points should
be noted about the individual elements of working capital.
a) The stock of raw materials is considerably higher than average. So there is a need
for stock control procedure to be reviewed.
b) The value of creditors is also above average; this indicates that XYZ Ltd. is
delaying the payment of creditors beyond the credit period. Although this is an
additional source of finance, it may result in a higher cost of raw materials or loss of
goodwill among the suppliers.
c) The finished goods stock is below average. This may be due to a high demand for
the firm's goods or to efficient stock control. A low finished goods stock can,
however, reduce sales since it can cause delivery delays.
d) Debts are collected more quickly than average. The company might have
employed good credit control procedure or offer cash discounts for early payments.
Example.4.4 A proforma cost sheet of a company provides the following particulars:
Elements of Cost
Material 40%
Direct Labour 20%
Overheads 20%
The following further particulars are available:
(a) It is proposed to maintain a level of activity of 2,00,000 units.
(b) Selling price is Rs.12/- per unit.
(c) Raw materials are expected to remain in stores for an average period of one
month.
(d) Materials will be in process, on averages half a month.
(e) Finished goods are required to be in stock for an average period of one month.
(f) Credit allowed to debtors is two months.
(g) Creditor allowed by suppliers is one month.
You may assume that sales and production follow a consistent pattern.
You are required to prepare a statement of working capital requirements, a
forecast Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet of the company assuming that:
Rs.
Share Capital 15,00,000
8% Debentures 2,00,000
Fixed Assets 13,00,000
Solution:
Statement of Working Capital
Current Assets: Rs. Rs.
Stock of Raw Materials (1 month)
80,000
Work in progress (1/2 month):
Materials
40,000
Labour
20,000
Overheads
20,000 80,000
Stock of Finished Goods (1 month)
Materials
80,000
Labour
40,000
Overheads
40,000
1,60,000
Debtors (2 months)
at cost
Material 1,60,000
Labour 80,000
Overheads 80,000 3,20,000
6,40,000
Less: Current Liabilities:
Creditors (1 month) for raw materials
80,000
Net Working Capital Required: 5,60,000
Note: Sales = (2,00,000 X 12 = Rs.24,00,000)
Forecast Profit and Loss Account
For the year ended….
Rs. Rs.
To Materials 9,60,000 By Cost of good old 19,20,000
To Wages 4,80,000
To Overheads 4,80,000
19,20,000 19,20,000
To Cost of goods sold 19,20,000 By Sales 24,00,000
To Gross profit c/d 4,80,000
24,00,000 24,00,000
To Interest on Debentures 16,000 By Gross Profit b/d 4,80,000
To Net Profit 4,64,000
4,80,000 4,80,000
Forecast Balance Sheet
as at……
Liabilities Rs. Assets Rs.
Share Capital 15,00,000 Fixed Assets 13,00,000
8% Debentures 2,00,000 Stocks:
Net Profit 4,64,000 Raw Materials 80,000
Creditors 80,000 Work-in-Progress 80,000
Finished Goods 1,60,000
Debtors 4,00,000
Cash & Bank Balance
(Balancing figure) 2,24,000
22,44,000 22,44,000
Working Notes:
(a) Profits have been ignored while preparing working capital requirements for the
following reasons:
(i) Profits may or may not be used for working capital.
(ii) Even if profits have to be used for working capital, they have to be reduced
by the amount of income tax, dividends, etc.
(b) Interest on debentures has been assumed to have been paid.
4.3 FINANCING OF WORKING CAPITAL
Working capital financing is done by various modes such as trade credit, cash
credit/bank overdraft, working capital loan, purchase of bills/discount of bills, bank
guarantee, letter of credit, factoring, commercial paper, inter-corporate deposits etc.
The arrangement of working capital financing forms a major part of the day to day
activities of a finance manager. It is a very crucial activity and requires continuous
attention because working capital is the money which keeps the day to day business
operations smooth. Without appropriate and sufficient working capital financing, a firmmay get into troubles. Insufficient working capital may result in nonpayment of certain
dues on time. Inappropriate mode of financing would result in loss of interest which
directly hits the profits of the firm.
4.15 Types of Working Capital Financing / Loans
A firm may adopt three types of financing policies as follows:
=>Long-term financing: The sources of long-term financing include ordinary
share capital, preference share capital, debentures, long-term borrowings from financial
institutions and reserves and surplus (retained earnings).
1. Long-Term Loan from a Bank:
Many companies opt for a full-fledged long term loan from a bank that allows them to
meet all their working capital needs for two, three or more years.
2. Retain Profits:
Rather than making dividend payments to shareholders or investing in new ventures,
many businesses retain a portion of their profits so that they may use it for working
capital. This way they do not have to take loans, pay interest, incur losses on
discounted bills, and they can be self-sufficient in their financing.
3. Issue Equities and Debentures:
In extreme cases when the business is really short of funds, or when the company is
investing in a large-scale venture, they might decide to issue debentures or bonds to the
general public or in some cases even equity stock. Of course, this will be done only by
conglomerates and only in cases when there is a need for a huge quantum of funds.
=>Short-term financing: The short-term financing is obtained for a period less
than one year. It is arranged in advance from banks and other suppliers of short-termfinance in the money market. Short-term finances include working capital funds frombanks, public deposits, commercial paper, factoring of receivable etc.
1. Overdraft Agreement:
By entering into an overdraft agreement with the bank, the bank will allow the business
to borrow up to a certain limit without the need for further discussion. The bank might
ask for security in the form of collateral and they might charge daily interest at a variable
rate on the outstanding debt. However, if the business is confident of making the
repayments quickly, then an overdraft agreement is a valuable source of financing, and
one that many companies resort to.
2. Accounts Receivable Financing:
Many banks and non-banking financial institutions provide invoice discounting facilities.
The company takes the commercial bills to the bank which makes the payment minus a
small fee. Then, on the due date the bank collects the money from the customer. This is
another popular method of financing especially among small traders. Businesses that
offer large terms of credit can carry on their operations without having to wait for the
customers to settle their bills.
3. Customer Advances:
There are many companies that insist on the customer making an advance payment
before selling them goods or providing a service. This is especially true while dealing
with large orders that take a long time to fulfill. This method also ensures that the
company has some funds to channelize into its operations for fulfilling those orders.
4. Selling Goods on Installment:
Many companies, especially those that sell television sets, fans, radios, refrigerators,
vehicles and so on, allow customers to make their payments in installments. Since
many of these items have become modern day essentials, their customers might not
come from well-to-do backgrounds or the cost of the product might be too prohibitive for
immediate payment. In such a case, instead of waiting for a large payment at the end,
they allow the customers to make regular monthly payments. This ensures that there is
a constant flow of funds coming into the business that does not choke up the accounts
receivable numbers.
5. Commercial Paper (CP):
CP is a debt instrument for short-term borrowing that enables highly-rated corporate
borrowers to diversify their sources of short-term borrowings, and provides an additional
financial instrument to investors with a freely negotiable interest rate. The maturity
period ranges from three months to less than 1 year.
6. Public Deposits:
Deposits from the public are one of the important sources of finance particularly for well
established big companies with huge capital base. The period of public deposits is
restricted to a maximum 5 years at a time and hence, this source can provide finance
only for short-term to medium-term, which could be more useful for meeting working
capital needs of the company. It is advisable to use the amounts of public deposits for
acquiring assets of long-term nature unless its pay back is very short.
=>Spontaneous financing: Spontaneous financing refers to the automatic
sources of short-term funds arising in the normal course of a business. Trade
(suppliers') credit and outstanding expenses are examples of spontaneous financing.
1. Trade Credit
This credit service offered by suppliers allows businesses to get goods and pay for themlater. This is a source of working capital that may be acquired from all suppliers
depending on the business arrangements, the type of business you conduct and the
worth of the credit to be offered.
2. Asset-Based Financing
A business may use its assets to secure working capital from financial institutions that
offer asset based loans. The asset includes machinery, vehicle or accounts receivable.
Accounts receivable are financial documents of people or companies that owe money to
the business and they may be traded in to finance working capital at discounting
companies.
3. Inventory Financing
These loans are secured with the business` inventory acting as the security. Finance for
working capital may be acquired through its inventory although the business cannot sell
it until the loan is repaid because the lender has the right to the inventory until the loan
has been repaid.
4. Accrued Expenses:
Another source of spontaneous short-term financing is the accrued expenses that arise
from the normal conduct of business. An accrued expense is an expense that has been
incurred, but has not yet been paid.
What should be the mix of short-and long-term sources in financing current assets?. Depending on the mix of short- and long-term financing, the approach followed by a
company may be referred to as: • matching approach
• Conservative approach
• Aggressive approach
(1)The Hedging or Matching Approach: The term ‘hedging’ refers to two off-selling
transactions of a simultaneous but opposite nature which counterbalance effect of each
other. With reference to financing mix, the term hedging refers to ‘process of matching
of maturities of debt with maturities of financial needs’. According to this approach the
maturity of sources of funds should match the nature of assets to be financed. This
approach is also known as ‘matching approach’ which classifies the requirements of
total working capital into permanent and temporary working capital.
The hedging approach suggests that permanent working capital requirements
should be financed with funds from long-term sources while temporary working capital
requirements should be financed with short-term funds. When the firm follows matching
approach, long-term financing will be used to finance fixed assets and permanent
current assets and short-term financing to finance temporary or variable current assets.
However, it should be realised that exact matching is not possible because of the
uncertainty about the expected lives of assets. The firm can adopt a financial plan which
matches the expected life of assets with the expected life of the source of funds raised
to finance assets. Thus, a ten-year loan may be raised to finance a plant with an
expected life of ten years; stock of goods to be sold in thirty days may be financed with
a thirty-day commercial paper or a bank loan.
Figure 4.7 is used to illustrate the matching plan over time.
The firm's fixed assets and permanent current assets are financed with long-term funds
and as the level of these assets increases, the long-term financing level also increases.
The temporary or variable current assets are financed with short-term funds and as their
level increases, the level of short-term financing also increases. Under matching plan,
no short-term financing will be used if the firm has fixed current assets sonly.
(2) The Conservative Approach: This approach suggests that the entire estimated
investments in current assets should be financed from long-term sources and short-termsources should be used only for emergency requirements. The distinct features of this
approach are:
(ii) Liquidity is greater
(iii) Risk is minimized
(iv) The cost of financing is relatively more as interest has to be paid
even on seasonal requirements for entire period.
A firm in practice may adopt a conservative approach in financing its current and fixed
assets. The financing policy of the firm is said to be conservative when it depends more
on long-term funds for financing needs. Under a conservative plan, the firm finances its
permanent assets and also a part of temporary current assets with long-term financing.
In the periods when the firm has no need for temporary current assets, the idle longterm funds can be invested in the tradable securities to conserve liquidity. The
conservative plan relies heavily on long-term financing and, therefore, the firm has less
risk of facing the problem of shortage of funds. The conservative financing policy is
shown in Figure 4.8
Trade off between the Hedging and Conservative Approaches
The hedging approach implies low cost, high profit and high risk while the conservative
approach leads to high cost, low profits and low risk. Both the approaches are the two
extremes and neither of them serves the purpose of efficient working capital
management. A trade off between the two will then be an acceptable approach. The
level of trade off may differ from case to case depending upon the perception of risk by
the persons involved in financial decision making. However, one way of determining the
trade off is by finding the average of maximum and the minimum requirements of
current assets. The average requirements so calculated may be financed out of longterm funds and excess over the average from short-term funds.
(3). Aggressive Approach: The aggressive approach suggests that entire estimated
requirements of current asset should be financed from short-term sources even a part of
fixed assets investments be financed from short-term sources. This approach makes
the finance – mix more risky, less costly and more profitable.
A firm may be aggressive in financing its assets. An aggressive policy is said to be
followed by the firm when it uses more short-term financing than warranted by me
matching plan. Under an aggressive policy, the firm finances a part of its permanent
current assets with short-term financing. Some extremely aggressive firms may even
finance a part of their fixed assets with short-term financing. The relatively more use of
short-term financing makes the firm more risky. The aggressive financing is illustrated in
Figure 4.9.
Hedging Vs Conservative Approach
Hedging Approach Conservative Approach
1. The cost of financing is
reduced.
1. The cost of financing is higher
2. The investment in net working
capital is nil.
2. Large Investment is blocked in
temporary working capital.
3. Frequent efforts are required to
arrange funds.
3. The firm does not face frequent
financing problems.
4. The risk is increased as firm is
vulnerable to sudden shocks.
4. It is less risky and firm is able to
absorb shocks.
Short-term vs. Long-term Financing: A Risk-Return Trade-off
A firm should decide whether or not it should use short-term financing. If short-termfinancing has to be used, the firm must determine its portion in total financing. This
decision of the firm will be guided by the risk-return trade-off. Short-term financing may
be preferred over long-term financing for two reasons: (i) the cost advantage and (ii)
flexibility. But short-term financing is more risky than long-term financing. Cost: Shortterm financing should generally be less costly than long-term financing. It has been
found in developed countries, like USA, that the rate of interest is related to the maturity
of debt. The relationship between the maturity of debt and its cost is called the termstructure of interest rates. The curve, relating to the maturity of debt and interest rates,
is called the yield curve. The yield curve may assume any shape, but it is generally
upward sloping. Figure 4.10 shows the yield curve. The figure indicates that more the
maturity greater the interest rate.
4.4 SOURCES OF WORKING CAPITAL
1.Trade Credit
This is simply the credit period which is extended by the creditor of the business. Trade
credit is extended based on the creditworthiness of the firm which is reflected by its
earning records, liquidity position, and records of payment. Just like other sources of
working capital financing, trade credit also comes with a cost after the free credit period.
Normally, it is a costly source as a means of financing business working capital.
2.Cash Credit / Bank Overdraft
Cash credit or bank overdraft is the most useful and appropriate type of working capital
financing extensively used by all small and big businesses. It is a facility offered by
commercial banks whereby the borrower is sanctioned a particular amount which can
be utilized for making his business payments. The borrower has to make sure that he
does not cross the sanctioned limit. The best part is that the interest is charged to the
extent the money is used and not on the sanctioned amount which motivates him to
keep depositing the amount as soon as possible to save on interest cost. Without a
doubt, this is a cost-effective working capital financing.
3.Working Capital Loans
Working capital loans are as good as term loan for a short period. These loans may be
repaid in installments or a lump sum at the end. The borrower should take such loans
for financing permanent working capital needs. The cost of interest would not allow
using such loans for temporary working capital.
4.Purchase / Discount of Bills
For a business, it is another good service provided by commercial banks for working
capital financing. Every firm generates bills in the normal course of business while
selling goods to debtors. Ultimately, that bill acts as a document to receive payment
from the debtor. The seller who requires money will approach the bank with that bill and
bank will apply the discount on the total amount of the bill based on the prevailing
interest rates and pay the remaining amount to the seller. On the date of maturity of that
bill, the bank will approach the debtor and collect the money from him.
5.Bank Guarantee
It is primarily known as non-fund based working capital financing. Bank guarantee is
acquired by a buyer or seller to reduce the risk of loss to the opposite party due to non- performance of the agreed task which may be repaying money or providing of some
services etc. A buyer ‘B1’ is buying some products from seller ‘S1’. In this case, ‘B1’
may acquire bank guarantee from the bank and give it to ‘S1’ to save him from the risk
of nonpayment. Similarly, if ‘S1’ may acquire bank guarantee and hand it over to ‘B1’ to
save him from the risk of getting lower quality goods or late delivery of goods etc. In
essence, a bank guarantee is revoked by the holder only in case of non-performance by
the other party. Bank charges some commission for same and may also ask for
security.
6.Letter of Credit
It is also known as non-fund based working capital financing. Letter of credit and bank
guarantee has a very thin line of difference. Bank guarantee is revoked and the bank
makes payment to the holder in case of non-performance of the opposite party
whereas, in the case of a letter of credit, the bank will pay the opposite party as soon as
the party performs as per agreed terms. So, a buyer would buy a letter of credit and
send it to the seller. Once the seller sends the goods as per the agreement, the bank
would pay the seller and collects that money from the buyer.
7.Intercorporate Loans and Deposits:
In present corporate world, it is a common practice that the company with surplus cash
will lend other companies for short period normally ranging from 60 days to 180 days.
The rate of interest will be higher than the bank rate of interest and depending on the
financial soundness of the borrower company. This source of finance reduces
intermediation of banks in financing.
8. Commercial Paper (CP):
CP is a debt instrument for short-term borrowing, that enables highly-rated corporate
borrowers to diversify their sources of short-term borrowings, and provides an additional
financial instrument to investors with a freely negotiable interest rate. The maturity
period ranges from three months to less than 1 year. Since it is a short-term debt, the
issuing company is required to meet dealers’ fees, rating agency fees and any other
relevant charges. Commercial paper is short-term unsecured promissory note issued by
corporation with high credit ratings.
9. Funds Generated from Operations:
Funds generated from operations, during an accounting period, increase working capital
by an equivalent amount. The two main components of funds generated fromoperations are retained profit and depreciation. Working capital will increase by the
extent of funds generated from operations.
10. Retained Profit:
Profit is the accretion of fund which is available for finance internally, to the extent it is
retained in the organization. Retained profits are an important source of working capital
finance.
11. Depreciation Provision:
Since there is no cash outflow to the extent of depreciation provided in the accounting, it
is used for financing the internal operations of a firm. The amount deducted towards
depreciation on fixed assets is not immediately used in acquisition of fixed assets and
such amount is retained in business for same time. This is used as a temporary source
of working capital so long as the capital expenditure is postponed. 12. Amortization Provisions:
Any provisions made for meeting the future payments or expenses such as provision for
dividend, provision for taxation, provision for gratuity etc. provide a source of finance so
long as they are kept in the business.
13.. Deferred Tax Payments:
Another source of short-term funds similar in character to trade credit is the credit
supplied by the tax authorities. This is created by the interval that elapses between the
earning of the profits by the company and the payment of the taxes due on them.
Deferred payment of taxes is also used as a temporary source of working capital so
long as the amount is deposited with the tax authorities. The taxes deducted at sources,
collection of sales tax and excise duty, retirement benefits deducted from salaries of
staff etc. also retained in business for some time and used as a source of working
capital.
14.Accrued Expenses:
Another source of spontaneous short-term financing is the accrued expenses that arise
from the normal conduct of business. An accrued expense is an expense that has been
incurred, but has not yet been paid. For most firms, one of the largest accrued
expenses is likely to be employees’ accrued wages. For large firms, the accrued wages
held by the firm constitute an important source of financing. Usually, accrued expenses
are not subject to much managerial manipulation.
15.Deposits and Advances:
The deposits collected from dealers and advances received from customers will also
constitute a source of finance.
16.. Public Deposits:
Deposits from the public is one of the important
source of finance particularly for well established
big companies with huge capital base. The period
of public deposits is restricted to a maximum 5
years at a time and hence, this source can provide
finance only for short-term to medium-term, which
could be more useful for meeting working capital
needs of the company. It is advisable to use the
amounts of public deposits for acquiring assets of
long-term nature unless its pay back is very short.
4.5 SUMMARY
 The term working capital may be used to denote either the gross working capital
which refers to total current assets or net working capital which refers to excess of
current asset over current liabilities.  The working capital requirement for a firm depends upon several factors such as
Nature or Character of Business, Credit Policy, Price level changes, business
cycles, manufacturing process, production policy.  The working capital need of the firm may be bifurcated into permanent and
temporary working capital.  The Hedging Approach says that permanent requirement should be financed by long
term sources while the temporary requirement should be financed by short-termsources of finance.  The Conservative approach on the other hand says that the working capital
requirement be financed from long-term sources.  The Aggressive approach says that even a part of permanent requirement may be
financed out of short-term funds. Every firm must monitor the working capital
position and for this purpose certain accounting ratios may be calculated. There is
no set formula for deciding the break-up.  The 'matching approach' suggests that long term financing be used to finance fixed
assets and permanent current assets, while short-term financing should be used to
finance temporary or variable current assets. Overall, a firm in practice adopts a
conservative approach in financing its current and fixed assets when it depends
more on long-term funds for financing needs. On the other hand, an aggressive
Check Your Progress
9. What are the main long- term
and short-term sources for
financing working capital?
10. What should be the mix of
snort-term and long-term sources
in financing current Assets?
11. List the main sources of
working capital.
12 What are the main forms by
means of which firms may avail
working capital finance from
banks?.
policy would be implied when a firm uses more short-term financing than suggested
by the matching plan. Usually, short-tem financing is more risky but less expensive
than long-term financing, and hence there is a risk-return trade-off.  The main sources of working capital include trade credit, accrued expenses and
deferred income, bank finance and commercial paper.  The main forms in which bank finance for working capital are availed of by firms
are overdraft facility, cash credit facility, bills purchasing/discounting facility and
working capital loan.
4.6 KEY TERMS
. Gross working capital: It refers to the firm's investment in current assets,
. Current assets: are the assets which can be converted into cash within an
accounting year • Net working capital refers to the difference between current assets and current
liabilities.
. Current liabilities are those claims of outsiders which are expected to mature for
payment within an accounting year
4.7ANSWERS TO CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
1. There is no set formula for deciding the break-up. The 'matching approach'
suggests that long term financing be used to finance fixed assets and permanent
current assets, while short-term financing should be used to finance temporary or
variable current assets. Overall, a firm in practice adopts a conservative approach in
financing its current and fixed assets when it depends more on long-term funds for
financing needs. On the other hand, an aggressive policy would be implied when a
firm uses more short-term financing than suggested by the matching plan. Usually,
short-terms financing is more risky but less expensive than long-term financing, and
hence there is a risk-return trade-off.
2. The main sources of working capital include trade credit, accrued expenses and
deferred income, bank finance and commercial paper.
3. The main forms in which bank finance for working capital are availed of by firms
are overdraft facility, cash credit facility, bills purchasing/discounting facility and
working capital loan.
4 .MM approach holds that under a perfect market situation the dividend policy of a
firm is irrelevant, as it does not affect the value of the firm.
4.8 .QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
1. Discuss different sources of working capital.
2. Explain the concept of operating cycle in determining working capital requirement of a
firm?
3. Differentiate between Gross working capital and Net working capital?
4. Differentiate between Permanent and Temporary working capital?
5.Elaborate the factors affecting the working capital requirement of a firm?