1.0 INTRODUCTION
Financial management is concerned with the planning and controlling of a firm's
financial resources. It was a branch of economics till 1890 and recently it has become a
separate discipline. The subject of financial management is of immense interest to both
academicians and practicing managers. It is of interest to academicians because the
subject is still developing, and there are areas where controversies still exist for which
no unanimous solutions have been found. Practicing managers are interested in this
subject because the most crucial decisions of the firm are related to finance, and an
understanding of the theory of financial management enables them to make those
decisions skillfully and correctly. This unit will discuss the nature and scope of finance,
the financial goals of organizations and finance functions.
1.1 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  Explain the nature of finance and its interaction with other management
functions.  Review the changing role of a finance manager and his/her position in the
management hierarchy.  Discuss agency problems arising from the relationship between shareholders
and managers.  Illustrate the organization of the finance function.  Focus on shareholder’s wealth maximization principle.
1.2 MEANING, NATURE AND SCOPE OF FINANCE
What is finance? What are the firm's financial activities? How are they related to the
firm's other activities? Financial management is a long term decision making process
which involves lot of planning, allocation of funds, discipline and much more. Nobody
can ever think to start a business or a company without financial knowledge and
management strategies. Finance links itself directly to several functional departments
like marketing, production and personnel. .Let us understand the nature of
financial management with reference of this discipline. 1.2.1Nature of Financial Management: Finance management is a long termdecision making process which involves lot of planning, allocation of funds, discipline
and much more. Let us understand the nature of financial management with reference
of this discipline.
1. Financial management is one of the important educations which have been realized
word wide. Now a day’s people are undergoing through various specialization courses
of financial management. Many people have chosen financial management as their
profession.
2. The nature of financial management is never a separate entity. Even as an
operational manager or functional manager one has to take responsibility of financial
management.
3. Finance is a foundation of economic activities. The person who manages finance is
called as financial manager. Important role of financial manager is to control finance and
implement the plans. For any company financial manager plays a crucial role in it. Many
times it happens that lack of skills or wrong decisions can lead to heavy losses to an
organization.
4. Nature of financial management is multi-disciplinary. Financial management depends
upon various other factors like: accounting, banking, inflation, economy, etc. for the
better utilization of finances.
5. Approach of financial management is not limited to business functions but it is a
backbone of commerce, economic and industry.
Some of the major scope of financial management is as follows: 1. Investment Decision
2. Financing Decision 3. Dividend Decision 4. Working Capital Decision. 1.2.2 Real and Financial Assets
Real asset can be defined as “assets that are tangible or physical in nature such as
property, plants and equipments. As an example in our bank many real assets can be
identified such as the buildings, computers, lands that we own, ATM machines,
vehicles, machineries such as note counters etc.
Financial assets can be defined as “assets in the form of stocks, bonds, rights,
certificates, bank balances, etc., as distinguished from tangible, physical assets”
(Pension Boards-UCC, 2009). For our bank financial assets can be identified as our
investments in bonds, issued by government and companies, bills issued by
government and companies, shares of other companies and debentures of other
companies, loans we have lent, reserves we hold at Central bank and etc.
Real assets are tangible and financial assets are intangible in nature. Real assets are
used in day to business operations to produce/generate an output where as financial
assets are used to generate a return by investing activities. In general by investing in
real assets company generates an income by way of profits earned from production
utilizing the asset, rent (from lands) and gain/loss on disposals. By investing in financial
assets company earns dividends, interest income and capital gains/loss upon disposal
of assets.
Firms issue securities to investors in the primary capital markets to raise necessary
funds. The securities issued by firms are traded - bought and sold - by investors in the
secondary capital markets, referred to as stock exchanges. Financial assets also
include lease obligations and borrowing from banks, financial institutions and other
sources. In a lease, the lessee obtains a right to use the lessor's asset for an agreed
amount of rental over the period of lease. Funds applied to assets by the firm are called
capital expenditures or investment. The firm expects to receive return on investment
and might distribute return (or profit) as dividends to investors.
1.2.3 Equity and Borrowed Funds
To raise capital, an enterprise either used owned sources or borrowed ones. Owned
capital can be in the form of equity, whereas borrowed capital refers to the company's
owed funds or say debt. Borrowed funds refer to the borrowings of a business firm. In a
company, borrowed funds consist of the finance raised from debenture holders, public
deposits, financial institutions and commercial banks. Equity refers to the stock,
indicating the ownership interest in the company.
Shareholders can be of two types: ordinary and preference. Preference
shareholders receive dividend at a fixed rate, and they have a priority over ordinary
shareholders. The dividend rate for ordinary shareholders is not fixed, and it can vary
from year to year depending on the decision of the board of directors. The payment of
dividends to shareholders is not a legal obligation; it depends on the discretion of the
board of directors. Since ordinary shareholders receive dividend (or repayment of
invested capital, only when the company is wound up) after meeting the obligations of
others, they are generally called owners of residue. Dividends paid by a company are
not deductible expenses for calculating corporate income taxes, and they are paid out of
profits after corporate taxes. As per the current laws in India, a company is required to
pay 12.5 per cent tax on dividends. Equity shares, preference shares, ploughing back of profits and debentures are
generally used for long-term finance. Public deposits, commercial banks and financial
institutions are the main sources of medium-term and short-term finance. A company
can also obtain equity funds by retaining earnings available for shareholders.
Retained earnings, which could be referred to as internal equity, are undistributed
profits of equity capital. The retention of earnings can be considered as a form of raising
new capital. If a company distributes all earnings to shareholders, then, it can reacquire
new'' capital from the same sources (existing shareholders) by issuing new shares
called rights shares. Also, a public issue of shares may be made to attract new (as well
as the existing) shareholders to contribute equity capital.
Another important source of securing capital is creditors or lenders. Lenders are
not the owners of the company. They make money available to the firm as loan or debt
and retain title to the funds lent. Loans are generally furnished for a specified period at a
fixed rate of interest. For lenders, the return on loans or debt comes in the form of
interest paid by the firm. Interest is a cost of debt to the firm. Payment of interest is a
legal obligation. The amount of interest paid by a firm is a deductible expense for
computing corporate income taxes. Thus, interest provides tax shield to a firm. The
interest tax shield is valuable to a firm. The firm may borrow funds from a large number
of sources, such as banks, financial institutions, public or by issuing bonds or
debentures. A bond or a debenture is a certificate acknowledging the amount of money
lent by a bondholder to the company. It states the amount, the rate of interest and the
maturity of the bond or debenture. Since bond or debenture is a financial instrument, it
can be traded in the secondary capital markets.
1.2.4 Finance and Management Functions
There is a valuable and undivided relationship between finance on the one hand and
production, marketing and other functions on the other. Almost all business activities,
directly or indirectly, involve the acquisition and use of funds. For example, recruitment
and promotion of employees in production is clearly a responsibility of the production
department; but it requires payment of wages and salaries and other benefits, and thus,
involves finance.
1.2.5 Scope of Financial Management/ Finance Function:- The main objective of financial management is to arrange sufficient finances for
meeting short term and long term needs. A financial manager will have to concentrate
on the following areas of finance function:
1. Estimating Financial Requirements: - The first task of financial manager is to estimate short term and long-termfinancial requirements of his business. For this purpose, he will prepare a financial plan
for present as well as for future. The amount required for purchasing fixed assets as
well as for working capital will have to be ascertained.
2. Deciding Capital Structure: - The capital structure refers to the kind and proportion of different securities
for raising funds. After deciding about the quantum of funds required, it should be
decided which type of securities should be raised. It may be wise to finance fixed assets
through long-term debts and current assets through short-term debts.
3. Selecting a Source of Finance: - After preparing capital structure, an appropriate source of finance is
selected. Various sources from which finance may be raised include: share capital,
debentures, financial institutions, commercial banks, public deposits etc. If finance is
needed for short period then banks, public deposits and financial institutions may be
appropriate. On the other hand, if long-term finance is required then, share capital, and
debentures may be useful.
4. Selecting a pattern of Investment: - When funds have been procured then a decision about investment pattern
is to be taken. The selection of an investment pattern is related to the use of funds. A
decision will have to be taken as to which asset is to be purchased. The funds will have
to be spent first on fixed assets and then an appropriate portion will be retained for
working capital. The decision-making techniques such as capital budgeting, opportunity
cost analysis etc. may be applied in making decisions about capital expenditures.
5. Proper cash Management: - Cash management is an important task of finance manager. He has to
assess various cash needs at different times and then make arrangements for arranging
cash. The cash management should be such that neither there is a shortage of it and
nor it is idle. Any shortage of cash will damage the credit worthiness of the enterprise.
The idle cash with the business will mean that it is not properly used. Cash flow
statements are used to find out various sources and application of cash.
6. Implementing Financial Controls:- An efficient system of financial management necessitates the use of
various control devises. Financial control devises generally used are budgetary control,
break even analysis; cost control, ratio analysis etc. The use of various techniques by
the finance manager will help him in evaluating the performance in various areas and
take corrective measures whenever needed.
7. Proper use of Surplus: - The utilization of profit or surplus is also an important factor in financial
management. A judicious use of surpluses is essential for expansion and diversification
plan and also in protecting the interest of shareholders. The finance manager should
consider the following factors before declaring the dividend;
a. Trend of earnings of the enterprise
b. Expected earnings in future.
c. Market value of shares.
d. Shareholders interest.
e. Needs of fund for expansion etc.
1.3 FINANCIAL GOAL: PROFIT MAXIMIZATION VS WEALTH MAXIMIZATION
The objective of a Financial Management is to design a method of operating the Internal
Investment and financing of a firm. The two widely used approaches are Profit
Maximization and Wealth maximization.
Investment and financing decisions of the firm's are continuous and unavoidable.
Generally the financial goal of the firm should be shareholders' wealth maximization
(SWM), as reflected in the market value of the firm's shares. In this section, we show
that the shareholders' wealth maximization is theoretically logical and operationally
feasible for guiding the financial decision-making.
1.3.1 Profit Maximization
Profit maximization is considered as the goal of financial management. In this
approach actions that increase the profits should be undertaken and the actions that
decrease the profits are avoided. The term 'profit' is used in two senses. In one sense it
is used as an owner oriented. In this concept it refers to the amount and share of
national Income that is paid to the owners of business. The second way is an
operational concept i.e. profitability. It is the traditional and narrow approach, which
aims at, maximizes the profit of the concern. The Ultimate aim of the business concern
is earning profit, hence, it considers all the possible ways to increase the profitability of
the concern. Profit is the parameter of measuring the efficiency of the business concern.
So it shows the entire position of the business concern. And hence Profit maximization
objectives help to reduce the risk of the business. Its main aim is to earn profit. In this
criteria Profit is the main parameter of business operation. It reduces the risk of
business concern. In this criteria profit is the main source of finance and profitability
meets the social needs.
Some of the unfavorable arguments of profit maximizations are that it leads
to exploiting workers and consumers. It also creates immoral practices such as corrupt
practice, unfair trade practice, etc. It also creates inequalities among the stake holders
such as customers, suppliers, public shareholders, etc.
1.3.2 Objections to Profit Maximization
1. In Profit Maximization, profit is not defined precisely or correctly. It creates some
unnecessary opinion regarding earning habits of the business concern. For
example, profit may be long term or short term. It may be total profit or rate of
profit. It may be net profit before tax or net profit after tax. It may be return on
total capital employed or total assets or shareholders equity and so on.
2. It ignores the time value of money: Profit maximization does not consider the
time value of money or the net present value of the cash inflow. It leads certain
differences between the actual cash inflow and net present cash flow during a
particular period. When the profitability is worked out the bigger the better
principle is adopted as the decision is based on the total benefits received over
the working life of the asset, Irrespective of when they were received.
3. It ignores the quality aspects of benefits which are associated with the financial
course of action. The term 'quality' means the degree of certainty associated with
which benefits can be expected. Therefore, the more certain the expected return,
the higher the quality of benefits. As against this, the more uncertain or
fluctuating the expected benefits, the lower the quality of benefits.
4. It ignores risk: Profit maximization does not consider risk of the business
concern. Risks may be internal or external which will affect the overall operation
of the business concern.
It suffers from the following limitations:
• It is vague
• It ignores the timing of returns
• It ignores risk.
Definition of profit: “Profit” is a vague term. It is because different mindset will have a
different perception of profit. For e.g. profits can be the net profit, gross profit, before tax
profit, or the rate of profit, short- or long-term profit, total profits or profit per share. Does
it mean total operating profit or profit accruing to shareholders ,etc.?
Time value of Money
The profit maximization formula simply suggests “higher the profit better is the
proposal”. In essence, it is considering the naked profits without considering the timing
of them. Another important dictum of finance says “a dollar today is not equal to a dollar
a year later”. So, the time value of money is completely ignored.
Uncertainty of returns: A decision solely based on profit maximization model would
take a decision in favor of profits. In the pursuit of profits, the risk involved is ignored
which may prove unaffordable at times simply because higher risks directly questions
the survival of a business. The streams of benefits may possess different degree of
certainty. Two firms may have same total expected earnings, but if the earnings of one
firm fluctuate considerably as compared to the other, it will be more risky. Possibly,
owners of the firm would prefer smaller but surer profits to potentially larger but less
certain profits.
Ignores Quality
The most problematic aspect of profit maximization as an objective is that it ignores the
intangible benefits such as quality, image, technological advancements etc. The
contribution of intangible assets in generating value for a business is not worth ignoring.
They indirectly create assets for the organization. 1.3.3 Maximizing Profit after Taxes
Profit after tax is the net profit attributable to shareholders of a company
after all costs and taxes have been deducted. This is the amount left to be paid out as
dividends to shareholders as a return on their investment or to be ploughedback into the
business as undistributed profits to add to the company's reserve.Maximising profit
means maximising profits after taxes, in the sense of net profit as reported in the profit
and loss account (income statement) of the firm. It can easily be realised that
maximising this figure will not maximize the economic welfare of the owners. It is
possible for a firm to increase profit after taxes by selling additional equity shares and
investing the proceeds in low-yielding assets, such as the government bonds. Profit
after taxes would increase but earnings per share (EPS) would decrease. To illustrate,
let us assume that a company has 20,000 shares outstanding, profit after taxes of
Rs.1,00,000 and earnings per share of Rs.5. If the company sells 20,000 additional
shares at Rs.50 per share and invests the proceeds (10,00,000) at 5 per cent after
taxes, then the total profits after taxes will increase to Rs.150,000. However, the
earnings per share will fall to Rs.3.75 (i.e.,Rs.150,000/40,000). This example clearly
indicates that maximising profits after taxes does not necessarily serve the best
interests of owners.
1.3.4 Maximizing EPS
Earnings per share (EPS) is the portion of the company’s distributable profit which is
allocated to each outstanding equity share (common share). Earnings per share are a
very good indicator of the profitability of any organization, and it is one of the most
widely used measures of profitability.
The earnings per share are a useful measure of profitability, and when compared with
EPS of other similar companies, it gives a view of the comparative earning power of the
companies. EPS when calculated over a number of years indicates whether the earning
power of the company has improved or deteriorated. Investors usually look for
companies with steadily increasing earnings per share.
Growth in EPS is an important measure of management performance because it shows
how much money the company is making for its shareholders, not only due to changes
in profit, but also after all the effects of issuance of new shares (this is especially
important when the growth comes as a result of acquisition).
If we adopt maximising EPS as the financial objective of the firm, this will also not
ensure the maximization of owners' economic welfare. It also suffers from the flaws
already mentioned, i.e. it ignores timing and risk of the expected benefits.
It is, thus, clear that maximising profits after taxes or EPS as the financial
objective fails to maximize the economic welfare of owners. Both methods do not take
account of the timing and uncertainty of the benefits. An alternative to profit
maximization, which solves these problems, is the objective of wealth maximization.
1.3.5 Wealth Maximization: Wealth maximization is one of the modern approaches,
which involves latest innovations and improvements in the field of the business concern.
The term wealth means shareholder wealth or the wealth of the persons those who are
involved in the business concern. Wealth maximization is also known as value
maximization or net present worth maximization. This objective is a universally accepted
concept in the field of business. It removes technical disadvantages of the profit
maximization. Wealth maximization is superior to the profit maximization because the
main aim of the business concern under this concept is to improve the value or wealth
of the shareholders. Wealth maximization considers the comparison of the value to cost
associated with the business concern. Total value detected from the total cost incurred
for the business operation. It provides extract value of the business concern. This
concept considers both time and risk of business concern. This criterion provides
efficient allocation of resources and it also ensures the economic interest of the society.
The wealth maximization criterion is based on cash flows generated and not on
accounting profit. The computation of cash inflows and cash outflows is precise. Wealth
maximization can be activated only with the help of the profitable position of the
business concern. So the goal of maximizing the value of the stock avoids the problems
associated with the different goals we discussed above. In a simple language a good
financial decisions increase the market value of the owners’ equity and poor financial
decisions decrease it. So the financial manager best serves the owners of the business
by identifying goods and services that add value to the firm because they are desired
and valued in the free marketplace. So it is a long term concept based on the cash flows
rather than profits and hence there can be a situation where a business makes losses
every year but there are cash profits because of heavy depreciation which indirectly
suggests heavy investment in fixed assets and that is the real wealth and it takes into
account the time value of money and so is universally accepted.
ShareShare Profit Maximisation an d Wealth Maximisation
1.3.6 Profit maximization vs. wealth maximization
The essential difference between the maximization of profits and the maximization
of wealth is that the profits focus is on short-term earnings, while the wealth focus is
on increasing the overall value of the business entity over time. These differences
are substantial, as noted below:
 Planning duration. Under profit maximization, the immediate increase of profits is
paramount, so management may elect not to pay for discretionary expenses, such
as advertising, research, and maintenance. Under wealth maximization,
management always pays for the discretionary expenditures.  Risk management. Under profit maximization, management minimizes expenditures,
so it is less likely to pay for hedges that could reduce the organization's risk profile.
A wealth-focused company would work on risk mitigation, so its risk of loss is
reduced.  Pricing strategy. When management wants to maximize profits, it prices products as
high as possible in order to increase margins. A wealth-oriented company could do
the reverse, electing to reduce prices in order to build market share over the long
term.  Capacity planning. A profit-oriented business will spend just enough on its
productive capacity to handle the existing sales level and perhaps the short-termsales forecast. A wealth-oriented business will spend more heavily on capacity in
order to meet its long-term sales projections.
It should be apparent from the preceding discussion that profit maximization is a
strictly short-term approach to managing a business, which could be damaging over
the long term. Wealth maximization focuses attention on the long term, requiring a
larger investment and lower short-term profits, but with a long-term payoff that
increases the value of the business.
1.3.7 Need for a Valuation Approach
The necessity for valuation of shares arises in the following circumstances:  Assessments under the wealth tax or gift tax acts.  Purchase of a block of shares which may or may not give the holder thereof a
controlling interest in the company.  Purchase of share by the employees of the company where the retention of such
shares is limited to the period of their employment.  Formulation of schemes of amalgamation, absorption, etc.  Acquisition of interest of dissenting shareholders under a scheme of
rationalization.  Compensating shareholders on the acquisition of their shares by the government
under a scheme of rationalization.  Conversation of shares i.e. preference into equity.
 Advancing of loan on the security of shares.  Resolving a deadlock in the management of a private limited company on the
basis of the controlling block of shares being given to either of the parties.
Normally, the price prevailing on the stock exchange is accepted.
Valuation by a valuer becomes a necessary when:  Shares are unquoted.  Shares relate to private limited companies.  Courts are direct.  Articles of association or relevant agreement so provide.  Large block of shares is under transfer.  Statutes so require.
. The financial manager must know or at least assume the factors that influence the
market price of shares, otherwise he or she would find himself or herself unable to
maximize the market value of the company's shares. What is the appropriate share
valuation model? In practice, innumerable factors influence the price of a share, and
also, these factors change very frequently. Moreover, these factors vary across shares
of different companies. For the purpose of the financial management problem, we can
phrase the crucial questions normally: How much should a particular share be worth?
Upon what factor or factors should its value depend? Although there is no simple
answer to these questions, it is generally agreed that the value of an asset depends on
its risk and return
1.3.8 Risk-Return Trade-Off The risk-return tradeoff is the principle that potential
return rises with an increase in risk. Low levels of uncertainty or risk are associated with
low potential returns, whereas high levels of uncertainty or risk are associated with high
potential returns. According to the risk-return tradeoff, invested money can render
higher profits only if the investor is willing to accept the possibility of losses. Financial decisions incur different degrees
of risk. Your decision to invest your
money in government bonds has less risk
as interest rate is known and the risk of
default is very less. On the other hand,
you would incur more risk if you decide to
invest your money in shares, as return is
not certain. However, you can expect a
lower return from government bond and
higher from shares. Risk and expected
return move in tandem; the greater the
risk, the greater the expected return.
Risk premiumRisk-free ReturnRisk
Expected
Return
Fig. 1.1 The Risk-Return Relationship
Check Your Progress
1. What is the advantage enjoyed by
financial assets vis-a-vis real
assets in a business?
2. What are the main types of
shareholder funds available to a
company?
3. Which are the major ways in which
a company may be able to raise
new capital?
4. Why are borrowed funds often
preferred over equity by firms to
fund their businesses?
Figure 1.1 shows this risk-return relationship.
Financial decisions of the firm are guided by the risk-return trade-off. These
decisions are interrelated and jointly affect
the market value of its shares by influencing
return and risk of the firm. The relationship
between return and risk can be simply
expressed as follows:
Return = Risk-free rate + Risk premium (1)
Risk-free rate is a rate obtainable
from a default-risk free government security.
An investor assuming risk from her
investment requires a risk premium above
the risk-free rate. Risk-free rate is a
compensation for time and risk premium for
risk. Higher the risk of an action, higher will be the risk premium leading to higher
required return on that action. A proper balance between return and risk should be
maintained to maximize the market value of a firm's shares. Such balance is called riskreturn trade-off, and every financial decision involves this trade-off. The interrelation
between market value, financial decisions and risk-return trade-off is depicted in Figure
1.2. It also gives an overview of the functions of financial management.
Financial Management
Maximisation of Share Value
Financial Decision
Investment
Decisions
Liquidity
Manageme
nt
Financing
Decisions
Dividend
Decisions
Return Risk Trade-off
Fig. 1.2 An overview of financial management
The financial manager, in a bid to maximize shareholders' wealth, should strive to
maximize returns in relation to the given risk; he or she should seek courses of actions
that avoid unnecessary risks. To ensure maximum return, funds flowing in and out of
the firm should be constantly monitored to assure that they are safeguarded and
properly utilized. The financial reporting system must be designed to provide timely and
accurate picture of the firm's activities.
1.4 FINANCE FUNCTIONS
It may be difficult to separate me finance functions from production, marketing and other
functions, but the functions themselves can be readily identified. The functions of raising
funds, investing them in assets and distributing returns earned from assets to
shareholders are respectively known as financing decision, investment decision and
dividend decision. A firm attempts to balance cash inflows and outflows while
performing these functions. This is called liquidity decision, and we may add it to the list
of important finance decisions or functions. Thus finance functions include:  Long-term asset-mix or investment decision
 Capital-mix or financing decision
 Profit allocation or dividend decision
 Short-term asset-mix or liquidity decision
A firm performs finance functions simultaneously and continuously in the normal
course of the business. They do not necessarily occur in a sequence. Finance functions
call for skilful planning, control and execution of a firm's activities.
Let us note at the outset that shareholders are made better off by a financial
decision that increases the value of their shares. Thus while performing the finance
functions, the financial manager should strive to maximize the market value of shares.
This point is elaborated in detail later on in the unit.
1.4.1 Investment Decision
One of the most important finance functions is to intelligently allocate capital to long
term assets. This activity is also known as capital budgeting. It is important to allocate
capital in those long term assets so as to get maximum yield in future. Following are the
two aspects of investment decision
a. Evaluation of new investment in terms of profitability
b. Comparison of cut off rate against new investment and prevailing investment.
Since the future is uncertain therefore there are difficulties in calculation of expected
return. Along with uncertainty comes the risk factor which has to be taken into
consideration. This risk factor plays a very significant role in calculating the expected
return of the prospective investment. Therefore while considering investment proposal it
is important to take into consideration both expected return and the risk involved.
Check Your Progress
5. List the main areas of financial
decision making.
6. What should be the main financial
goal of a firm?
7. Why are indicators like profits
after taxes and earnings per
share not the best ways to decide
the financial goals of a firm?
Investment decision not only involves allocating capital to long term assets but also
involves decisions of using funds which are obtained by selling those assets which
become less profitable and less productive. It wise decisions to decompose depreciated
assets which are not adding value and utilize those funds in securing other beneficial
assets. An opportunity cost of capital needs to be calculating while dissolving such
assets. The correct cut off rate is calculated by using this opportunity cost of the
required rate of return (RRR)
1.4.2 Financing Decision
Financial decision is yet another important
function which a financial manger must
perform. It is important to make wise
decisions about when, where and how should
a business acquire funds. Funds can be
acquired through many ways and channels.
Broadly speaking a correct ratio of an equity
and debt has to be maintained. This mix of
equity capital and debt is known as a firm’s
capital structure.
A firm tends to benefit most when the market
value of a company’s share maximizes this
not only is a sign of growth for the firm but
also maximizes shareholders wealth. On the
other hand the use of debt affects the risk and
return of a shareholder. It is more risky though it may increase the return on equity
funds.
A sound financial structure is said to be one which aims at maximizing shareholders
return with minimum risk. In such a scenario the market value of the firm will maximize
and hence an optimum capital structure would be achieved. Other than equity and debt
there are several other tools which are used in deciding a firm capital structure.
1.4.3 Dividend Decision
Earning profit or a positive return is a common goal of all the businesses. But the key
function a financial manger performs in case of profitability is to decide whether to
distribute all the profits to the shareholders or retain all the profits or distribute part of
the profits to the shareholder and retain the other half in the business.
It’s the financial manager’s responsibility to decide an optimum dividend policy which
maximizes the market value of the firm. Hence an optimum dividend payout ratio is
calculated. It is a common practice to pay regular dividends in case of profitability
another way is to issue bonus shares to existing shareholders.
Bonus shares are shares issued to the existing shareholders without any charge. The
financial manager should consider the questions of dividend stability, bonus shares and
cash dividends in practice.
1.4.4 Liquidity Decision
It is very important to maintain a liquidity position of a firm to avoid insolvency. Firm’s
profitability, liquidity and risk all are associated with the investment in current assets. In
order to maintain a tradeoff between profitability and liquidity it is important to invest
sufficient funds in current assets. But since current assets do not earn anything for
business therefore a proper calculation must be done before investing in current assets.
Current assets should properly be valued and disposed of from time to time once they
become non profitable. Currents assets must be used in times of liquidity problems and
times of insolvency.
In sum, financial decisions directly concern the firm's decision to acquire or
dispose off assets and require commitment or recommitment of funds on a continuous
basis. It is in this context that finance functions are said to influence production,
marketing and other functions of the firm. Hence finance functions may affect the size,
growth, profitability and risk of the firm, and ultimately, the value of the firm.
1.5 INNOVATIVE FINANCE FUNCTIONS
Who is a financial manager? What is his or her role? A financial manager is a person
who is responsible, in a significant way, to carry out the finance functions. It should be
noted that, in a modern enterprise, the financial manager occupies a key position. He or
she is one of the members of the top management team, and his or her role, day-by- day, is becoming more pervasive, intensive and significant in solving the complex funds
management problems. Now his or her function is not confined to mat of a scorekeeper
maintaining records, preparing reports and raising funds when needed, nor is he or she
a staff officer-in a passive role of an adviser. The finance manager is now responsible
for shaping the fortunes of the enterprise, and is involved in the most vital decision of
the allocation of capital. In his or her new role, he or she needs to have a broader and
far-sighted outlook, and must ensure that the funds of the enterprise are utilized in the
most efficient manner. He or she must realize that his or her actions have far-reaching
consequences for the firm because they influence the size, profitability, growth, risk and
survival of the firm, and as a consequence, affect the overall value of the firm The
financial manager, therefore, must have a clear understanding and a strong grasp of the
nature and scope of the finance functions.
The financial manager has not always been in the dynamic role of decision
making. About three decades ago, he or she was not considered an important person,
as far as the top management decision-making was concerned. He or she became an
important management person only which the advent of the modern or contemporary
approach to the financial management. What are the main functions of a financial
manager?
1.5.1 Fund Raising
The traditional approach dominated the scope of financial management and limited the
role of the financial manager simply to funds raising. It was during the major events,
such as promotion, reorganization, expansion or diversification in the firm dial the
financial manager was called upon to raise funds. In his or her day-to-day activities, his
or her only significant duty was to see that the firm had enough cash to meet its
obligations. Because of its central emphasis on the procurement of funds, the finance
textbooks, for example, in the USA, till the mid 1950s covered discussion of the
instruments, institutions and practices through which funds were obtained. Further, as
the problem of raising funds was more intensely felt in the special events, these books
also contained detailed descriptions of the major events like mergers, consolidations,
reorganizations and recapitalizations involving episodic financing. The finance books
in India and other countries simply followed the American pattern. The notable feature
of the traditional view of financial management was the assumption that the financial
manager had no concern with the decision of allocating the firm's funds. These
decisions were assumed as given, and he or she was required to raise the needed
funds from a combination of various sources.
The traditional approach did not go unchallenged even during the period of its
dominance. But the criticism related more to the treatment of various topics rather than
the basic definition of the finance function. The traditional approach has been criticized
because it failed to consider the day-to-day managerial problems relating to finance of
the firm. It concentrated itself to looking into the problems from management's point of
view. Thus the traditional approach of looking at the role of the financial manager lacked
a conceptual framework for making financial decisions, misplaced emphasis on raising
of funds, and neglected the real issues relating to the allocation and management of
funds.
1.5.2 Fund Allocation
The traditional approach outlived its utility in the changed business situation particularly
after the mid 1950s. A number of economic and environmental factors, such as the
increasing pace of industrialization, technological innovations and inventions, intense
competition, increasing intervention of government on account of management
inefficiency and failure, population growth and widened markets, during and after mid
1950s, necessitated efficient and effective utilization of the firm's resources, including
financial resources. The development of a number of management skills and decision
making techniques facilitated the implementation of a system of optimum allocation of
the firm's resources. As a result, the approach to, and the scope of financial
management, also changed. The emphasis shifted from the episodic financing to the
financial management, from raising of funds to efficient and effective use of funds. The
new approach is embedded in sound conceptual and analytical theories.
The new or modern approach to finance is an analytical way of looking into the
financial problems of the firm. Financial management is considered a vital and an
integral part of overall management. To quote Ezra Solomon:
In this broader view the central issue of financial policy is the wise use of funds,
and the central process involved is a rational matching of advantages of potential uses
against the cost of alternative potential sources so as to achieve the broad financial
goals which an enterprise sets for itself.
Thus, in a modern enterprise, the basic finance function is to decide about the
expenditure decisions and to determine the demand for capital for these expenditures.
In other words, the financial manager, in his or her new role, is concerned with the
efficient allocation of funds. The allocation of funds is not a new problem, however. It
did exist in the past, but it was not considered important enough in achieving the firm's
long run objectives.
In his or her new role of using funds wisely, the financial manager must find a
rationale for answering the following three questions:  How large should an enterprise be, and how fast should it grow?
 In what form should it hold its assets?
 How should the funds required be raised?
As discussed earlier, the questions stated above relate to three broad decision areas
of financial management: investment (including both long and short-term assets),
financing and dividend. The "modern" financial manager has to help making these
decisions in the most rational way. They have to be made in such a way that the funds
of the firm are used optimally. We have referred to these decisions as managerial
finance functions since they require special care and extraordinary managerial ability.
As discussed earlier, the financial decisions have a great impact on all other
business activities. The concern of the financial manager, besides his traditional
function of raising money, will be on determining the size and technology of the firm, in
setting the pace and direction of growth and in shaping the profitability and risk
complexion of the firm by selecting the best asset mix and financing mix,
1.5.3 Profit Planning
The functions of the financial manager may be broadened to include profit-planning
function. Profit planning refers to the operating decisions in the areas of pricing, costs,
volume of output and the firm's selection of product lines. Profit planning is, therefore, a
prerequisite for optimizing investment and financing decisions. The cost structure of the
firm, i.e. the mix of fixed and variable costs has a significant influence on a firm's
profitability. Fixed costs remain constant while variable costs change in direct proportion
to volume changes. Because of the fixed costs, profits fluctuate at a higher degree than
the fluctuations in sales. The change in profits due to the change in sales is referred to
as operating leverage. Profit planning helps to anticipate the relationships between
volume, costs and profits and develop action plans to face unexpected surprises.
1.5.4 Understanding Capital Markets
Capital markets bring investors (lenders) and firms (borrowers) together. Hence the
financial manager has to deal with capital markets. He or she should fully understand
the operations of capital markets and the way in which the capital markets value
securities. He or she should also know-how risk is measured and how to cope with it in
investment and financing decisions. For example, if a firm uses excessive debt to
finance its growth, investors may perceive it as risky. The value of the firm's share may,
therefore, decline. Similarly, investors may not like the decision of a highly profitable,
growing firm to distribute dividend. They may like the firm to reinvest profits in attractive
opportunities that would enhance their prospects for making high capital gains in the
future. Investments also involve risk and return. It is through their operations in capital
markets that investors continuously evaluate the actions of the financial manager.
The vital importance of the financial decisions to a firm makes it imperative to set
up a sound and efficient organization for the finance functions. The ultimate
responsibility of carrying out the finance functions lies with the top management. Thus,
a department to organize financial activities may be created under the direct control of
the board of directors. The board may constitute a finance committee. The executive
heading the finance department is the firm's chief finance officer (CFO), and he or she
may be known by different designations. The finance committee or CFO will decide the
major financial policy matters, while the routine activities would be delegated to lower
levels. For example, at BHEL a director of finance at the corporate office heads the
finance function. He is a member of the board of directors and reports to the chairman
and managing director (CMD). An executive director of finance (EDF) and a general
manager of finance (GMF) assist the director of finance. EDF looks after funding,
budgets and cost, books of accounts, financial services and cash management. GMF is
responsible for internal audit and taxation.
The reason for placing the finance functions in the hands of top management
may be attributed to the following factors: First, financial decisions are crucial for the
survival of the firm. The growth and development of the firm is directly influenced by the
financial policies. Second, the financial actions determine solvency of the firm. At no
cost can a firm afford to threaten its solvency. Because solvency is affected by the flow
of funds, which is a result of the various financial activities, top management being in a
position to coordinate these activities retains finance functions in its control. Third,
centralization of the finance functions can result in a number of economies to the firm.
For example, the firm can save in terms of interest on borrowed funds, can purchase
fixed assets economically or issue shares or debentures efficiently.
1.5.5 Status and Duties of Finance Executives
The exact organization structure for financial management will differ across firms. It will
depend on factors such as the size of the firm, nature of the business, financing
operations, capabilities, of the firm's financial officers and most importantly, on the
financial philosophy of the firm. The designation of the chief financial officer (CFO)
would also differ within firms. In some firms, the financial officer may be known as me
financial manager, while in others as the vice-president of finance or the director of
finance or the financial controller. Two more officers—treasurer and controller— may be
appointed under the direct supervision of CFO to assist him or her. In larger companies,
with modern management, there may be vice-president or director of finance, usually
with both controller and treasurer reporting to him.15
Figure 1.3 illustrates the financial organization of a large (hypothetical) business
firm. It is a simple organization chart, and as stated earlier, the exact organization for a
firm will depend on its circumstances. The finance function is one of the major functional
areas, and the financial manager or director is under the control of the board of
directors. Figure 1.4 shows the organization for the finance function of a large, multi- divisional Indian company.
Board of Directors
Managing Director
Production Director
Production
Director
Personnel
Director
Financial
Director
Marketing
Director
Treasurer Controller
Fig. 1.3 Organization for Finance Function
Planning and
Budgeting
Inventory
Management
Performance
Evaluation
Accounting
Auditing Credit
Management
Retirement
Benefits
Cost Control
Board of Directors
Managing Director
Production Director
Production
Director
Personnel
Director
Financial
Director
Marketing
Director
Treasurer Controller
Fig. 1.3 Organization for Finance Function
Planning
and
Budgeting
Inventory
Managemen
t
Performance
Evaluation
Accounting
Auditing Credit
Managemen
t
Retirement
Benefits
Cost Control
CFO has both line and staff responsibilities. He or she is directly concerned with
the financial planning and control. He or she is a member of the top management, and
he or she is closely associated with the formulation of policies and making decisions for
the firm. The treasurer and controller, if a company has these executives, would operate
under CFO's supervision. He or she must guide them and others in the effective working
of the finance department.
The main function of the treasurer is to manage the firm's funds. His or her major
duties include forecasting the financial needs, administering the flow of cash, managing
credit, floating securities, maintaining relations with financial institution and protecting
funds and securities. On the other hand, the functions of the controller relate to the
management and control of assets. His or her duties include providing information to
formulate accounting and costing policies, preparation of financial reports, direction of
internal auditing, budgeting, inventory control, taxes etc. It may be stated that the
controller's functions concentrate the asset side of the balance sheet, while treasurer's
functions relate to the liability side.
1.5.6 Controller's and Treasurer's Functions in the Indian Context
The controller and the treasurer are essentially American terms. Generally speaking,
the American pattern of dividing the financial executive's functions into controllership
and treasurer ship functions is not being widely followed in India. We do have a number
of companies in India having officers with the designation of the controller, or the
financial controller. The controller or the financial controller in India, by and large,
performs the functions of a chief accountant or management accountant. The officer
with the title of treasurer can also be found in a few companies in India.
It should be realised that the financial controller does not control finances; he or
she develops, uses and interprets information—some of which will be financial in
nature—for management control and planning. For this reason, the financial controller
may simply be called as the controller. Management of finance or money is a separate
and important activity. Traditionally, the accountants have been involved in managing
money in India. But the difference in managing money resources and information
resources should be appreciated.
In the American business, the management of finance is treated as a separate
activity and is being performed by the treasurer. The title of the treasurer has not found
favour in India to the extent the controller has. The company secretary in India
discharges some of the functions performed by the treasurer in the American context.
Insurance coverage is an example in this regard. The function of maintaining relations
with investors (particularly shareholders) may now assume significance in India
because of the development in the Indian capital markets and the increasing awareness
among investors.
The general title, financial manager or finance director, seems to be more
popular in India. This title is also better than me title of treasurer since it conveys the
functions involved. The main function of the financial manager in India should be the
management of the company's funds. The financial duties may often be combined with
Check Your Progress
8. What are the major roles that
the Chief Finance Officer (CFO)
of a firm is expected to play in
today's business environment?
others. But the significance of not combining the financial manager's duties with others
should be realised. The managing of funds—a very valuable resource—is a business
activity requiring extraordinary skill on the part of the financial manager. He or she
should ensure the optimum use of money under various constraints. He or she should,
therefore, be allowed to devote his or her full energy and time in managing the money
resources only.
1.6 SUMMARY
 The finance functions can be divided into three broad categories: (1) investment
decision, (2) financing decision, and (3) dividend decision. In other words, the
firm decides how much to invest in short-term and long-term assets and how to
raise the required funds.  In making financial decisions, the financial manager should aim at increasing the
value of the shareholders' stake in the firm. This is referred to as the principle of
shareholders' wealth maximization (SWM).  Wealth maximization is superior to profit maximization since wealth is precisely
defined as net present value and it accounts for time value of money and risk.  Shareholders and managers have the principal-agent relationship. In practice,
there may arise a conflict between the interests of shareholders and managers.
This is referred to the agency problem and the associated costs are called
agency costs. Offering ownership rights (in the form of stock options) to
managers can mitigate agency costs.  The financial manager raises capital
from the capital markets. He or she
should therefore know how the capital
markets function to allocate capital to
the competing firms and how security
prices are determined in the capital
markets.  Most companies have only one chief
financial officer (CFO). But a large
company may have both a treasurer and
a controller, who may or may not operate under a CFO.  The treasurer's function is to raise and manage company funds while the
controller oversees whether the funds are correctly applied. A number of
companies in India either have a finance director or a vice-president of finance as
the chief financial officer.
1.7 KEY TERMS
 Profit Planning: The operating decisions in the areas of pricing, costs, volume of
output and the firm's selection of product lines.  Operating Leverage: The change in profits due to the change in sales.  Opportunity Cost of Capital: The expected rate of return that an investor could
earn by investing his or her money in financial assets of equivalent risk.
 Net Present Value (NPV): The NPV of a course of action is the difference
between the present value of its benefits and the present value of its costs.
1.8 ANSWERS TO 'CHECK YOUR PROGRESS'
1. Financial assets like shares and bonds can be bought or sold more easily. Real
assets like plant and machinery, building etc. are not as liquid as financial assets
are.
2. Mostly equity funds consisting of ordinary shares and undistributed profits
(retained earnings).
3. By issuing new shares to the general public as well as to existing shareholders
which are known as rights shares.
4. A firm borrows money from lenders; they are not owners of the business. There
are three reasons for preferring borrowed funds: (1) Unlike dividends on
shareholder funds, the amount of interest paid on borrowed funds by a firm saves
taxes as it is treated as a deductible expense while computing income tax
payable by a firm. (2) The shareholders' return will be higher if the interest rate
on borrowed funds is less than return from assets or business. (3) It is relatively
easy to raise borrowed funds from a financial institution or bank than issuing
equity funds.
5. The main areas of financial decision making are (1) the investment decision (or
capital budgeting decision), (2) the financing decision (or capital structure
decision), (3) the dividend decision (or profit allocation decision) and (4) the
liquidity decision (or working capital management decision).
6. The main financial goal of a firm is to create value for shareholders by
maximizing the wealth of shareholders.
7. The CFO, heading the finance function of a company, is often a member of the
Board of Directors and reports to the Chairman & Managing Director of the
Company. Typically, the CFO supervises the work of the Treasurer and the
Controller, who in turn look after various functional areas.
1.9 QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
Short- Answer Questions
1. Define the scope of financial management. What role should the financial
manager play in a modern enterprise?
2. What are the basic financial decisions? How do they involve risk-return trade-off?
3. How should the finance function of an enterprise be organized? What functions
does the financial officer perform?
4. When can there arise a conflict between shareholders' and managers' goals?
How does the wealth maximization goal take care of this conflict?
Long-Answer Questions
1. How does the "modern" financial manager differ from the "traditional" financial
manager? Does the "modern" financial manager's role differ for the large
diversified firm and the small to medium size firm?
2. "Profit maximization is not an operationally feasible criterion". Do you agree?
Illustrate your views.
3. In what ways is the wealth maximization objective superior to the profit
maximization objective? Explain.
4. Should the titles of controller and treasurer be adopted under Indian context?
Would you like to modify their functions in view of the company practices in
India? Justify your opinion.
UNIT-2
COST OF CAPITAL
2.1 COST OF CAPITAL
In this unit, we focus on the concept of the cost of capital as a discount rate and the
procedure of its measurement.
The opportunity cost of capital (or simply, the cost of capital) for a project is the
discount rate for discounting its cash flows. The project's cost of capital is the minimumrequired rate of return on funds committed to the project, which depends on the
riskiness of its cash flows. Since the investment projects undertaken by a firm may differ
in risk, each one of them will have its own unique cost of capital. It should be clear at
the outset that the cost of capital for a project is defined by its risk, rather than the
characteristics of the firm undertaking the project.
The firm represents the aggregate of investment projects undertaken by it.
Therefore, the firm's cost of capital will be the overall, or average, required rate of return
on the aggregate of investment projects. Thus the firm's cost of capital is not the same
thing as the project's cost of capital. Can we use the firm's cost of capital for discounting
the cash flows of an investment projects. The firm's cost of capital can be used for
discounting the cash flows of those investment projects, which have risk equivalent to
the average risk of the firm. As a first step, however, the firm's cost of capital can be
used as a standard for establishing the required rates of return of the individual
investment projects. In the absence of a reliable formal procedure of calculating the cost
of capital for projects, the firm's cost of capital can be adjusted upward or downward to
account for risk differentials of investment projects. That is, an investment project's
required rate of return may be equal to the firm's cost of capital plus or minus a risk
adjustment factor depending on whether the project's risk is higher or lower than the
firm's risk. There does exit a methodology to calculate its cost of capital for projects. The
objective method of calculating the risk-adjusted cost of capital for projects is to use the
capital asset pricing model (CAPM), as we show later in this unit.
2.1.1 Meaning and Significance of Cost of Capital
We should recognize that the cost of capital is one of the most difficult and disputed
topics in the finance theory. Financial experts express conflicting opinions as to the
correct way in which the cost of capital can be measured. Irrespective of the
measurement problems, it is a concept of vital importance in the financial decision
making. It is useful as a standard for:  evaluating investment decisions,  designing a firm's debt policy, and
 appraising the financial performance of top management.
Investment evaluation
The primary purpose of measuring the cost of capital is its use as a financial
standard for evaluating the investment projects. In the NPV method, an investment
project is accepted if it has a positive NPV. The project's NPV is calculated by
discounting its cash flows by the cost of capital. In this sense, the cost of capital is the
discount rate used for evaluating the desirability of an investment project. In the IRR
method, the investment project is accepted if it has an internal rate of return greater
than the cost of capital. In this context, the cost of capital is the minimum required rate
of return on an investment project. It is also known as the cutoff rate, or the hurdle rate.
An investment project that provides a positive NPV when its cash flows are
discounted by the cost of capital makes a net contribution to the wealth of shareholders.
If the project has zero NPV, it means that its cash flows, have yielded a return just equal
to the cost of capital, and the acceptance or rejection of the project will not affect the
wealth of shareholders. The cost of capital is the minimum required rate of return on the
investment project that keeps the present wealth of shareholders unchanged. It may be,
thus, noted that the cost of capital represents a financial standard for allocating the
firm's funds, supplied by owners and creditors, to the various investment projects in the
most efficient manner.
Designing debt policy
The debt policy of a firm is significantly influenced by the cost consideration. As
we shall learn later on, debt helps to save taxes, as interest on debt is a tax-deductible
expense. The interest tax shield reduces the overall cost of capital, though it also
increases the financial risk of the firm. In designing the financing policy, that is, the
proportion of debt and equity in the capital structure, the firm aims at maximising the
firm value by minimizing the overall cost of capital.
The cost of capital can also be useful in deciding about the methods of financing
at a point of time. For example, cost may be compared in choosing between leasing and
borrowing. Of course, equally important considerations are control and risk.28
Performance appraisal
The cost of capital framework can be used to evaluate the financial performance of top
management.29 Such an evaluation will involve a comparison of actual profitability of the
investment projects undertaken by the firm with the projected overall cost of capital, and
the appraisal of the actual costs incurred by management in raising the required funds.
The cost of capital also plays a useful role in dividend decision and investment in
current assets.
2.1.2 Calculation of Cost of Debt
A company may raise debt in a variety of ways. It may borrow funds from financial
institutions or public either in the form of public deposits or debentures (bonds) for a
specified period of time at a certain rate of interest. A debenture or bond may be Issued
at par or at a discount or premium as compared to its face value. The contractual rule of
interest or the coupon rate forms the basis for calculating the cost of debt.
Debt issued at par
The method of computation for ascertaining cost of debt which is issued at par is
comparatively an easy task. It is nothing but the explicit interest rate adjusted again for
the tax liability.
Symbolically,
Example:
A company has issued 8% debentures and the tax rate is 50%, the after tax cost of debt
will be 4%. — It may be’ calculated as under:
kd=(1-50%)8=(1-0.5)8=4
Since interest is treated as an expense while calculating firm’s income for income- tax
purpose, the tax is deducted out of the interest payable. This tax adjusted interest rate
is used only where the EBIT (Earnings/Profits before Interest and Tax) is equal to or
exceed the interest.
The before-tax cost of debt is the rate of return required by lenders. It is easy to
compute before-tax cost of debt issued and to be redeemed at par; it is simply equal to
the contractual (or coupon) rate of interest. For example, a company decides to sell
new issue of 7 year 15 per cent bonds of Rs. 100 each at par. If the company realizes
the full face value of Rs. 100 bond and will pay Rs. 100 principal to bondholders at
maturity, the before-tax cost of debt will simply be equal to the rate of interest of 15 per
cent.
Thus: kd= i = (13)
where kd is the before-tax cost of debt, i is the coupon rate of interest, B0 is the issue
price of the bond (debt) and in Equation (13) it is assumed to be equal to the face value
(F), and INT is the amount of interest. The amount of interest payable to the lender is
always equal to:
Interest = Face value of debt x Interest rate
The before-tax cost of bond in the example is:
kd =
.
. = 0.15 or 15%
We could arrive at same results as above by using Equation (13): cash outflow are Rs.
15 interest per year for 7 years and Rs. 100 at the end of seventh year in exchange for
Rs 100 now. Thus:
By trial and error, we find that the discount rate (kd), which solves the equation, is 15 per
cent:
100 = 15(4.160) + 100(0.376) = 62.40 + 37.60 = 100
Clearly, the before-tax cost of bond is the rate, which the investment should yield to
meet the outflows to bondholders.
Debt issued at discount or premium
In many cases, bonds or debentures may be issued at a premium (when, it is more than
the face value) or at a discount (when it is less than the face value). In that case, the
cost of debt must not be equal to the coupon rate of interest. Moreover, if discounts or
premiums are amortized for income-tax purposes, it should also be considered.
(14)
Illustration 2.1: A company issues 10% Debentures tor Rs. 2,00,000 Rate of tax is
55%. Calculate the cost of debt (after tax) if the debentures are issued (i) at par (ii) at a
discount of 10% and (iii) at a premium of 10%.
Solution:
Cost of debt is calculated as under:
Solution:
(i) Issued at Par
= Rs. 20,000/Rs. 2,00,000 (1 – .55)
=1/10 x .45
= 4.5%
(ii) Issued at a Discount of 10%
Rs. 20,000/Rs. 1,80,000 (1 – .55)
= 1/9 x .45
= 5 %
(iii) Issued at Premium of 10%
Rs. 20,000/Rs. 2,20,000 (1 – .55)
= 1/11 x .45
= 4.1 %
Illustration:2.2
A company raises Rs 90,000 by the issue of 1,000 10% Debentures of Rs. 100 each at
a discount of 10%, repayable at par after 10 years. If the rate of company’s tax is 50,
what is the cost of debt capital to the firm?
Solution:
Cost of Redeemable Debt:
If debt and/or debentures are redeemed after the expiry of a period, the effective cost of
debt before tax can be calculated with the help of the following formula:
(15)
Illustration:2.3
A company issues 10,000, 10% Debentures of Rs.10 each and realizes Rs.95,000 after
allowing 5% commission to brokers. The debentures are redeemed after 10 years.
Calculate the effective cost of debt before tax.
Solution:
Tax adjustment
The interest paid on debt is tax deductible. The higher the interest charges, the lower
will be the amount of tax payable by the firm. This implies that the government indirectly
pays a part of the lender's required rate of return. As a result of the interest tax lenders,
the after-tax cost of debt to the firm will be substantially less than the investors' required
rate of return. The before-tax cost of debt, kd, should, therefore, be adjusted for the tax
effect as follows:
After- tax cost of debt = kd (l -T) (16)
where T is the corporate tax rate. If the before-tax cost of bond in our example is 16.5
per cent, and the corporate tax rate is 35 per cent, the after-tax cost of bond will be:
kd (l -T)= 0.1650(1-0.35) = 0.l073 or 10.73%
It should be noted that the tax benefit of interest deductibility would be available
only when the firm is profitable and is paying taxes. An unprofitable firm is not required
to pay any taxes. It would not gain any tax benefit associated with the payment of
interest, and its true cost of debt is the before-tax cost.
It is important to remember that in the calculation of the average cost of capital,
the after-tax cost of debt must be used, not the before-tax cost of debt.
2.2 COST OF PREFERENCE CAPITAL
The cost of preference share capital is apparently the dividend which is committed and
paid by the company. This cost is not relevant for project evaluation because this is not
the cost at which further capital can be obtained. To find out the cost of acquiring
the marginal cost, we will be finding the yield on the preference share based on the
current market value of the preference share. The measurement of the cost of
preference capital poses some conceptual difficulty. In the case of debt, there is a
binding legal obligation on the firm to pay interest, and tax interest constitutes the basis
to calculate the cost of debt. However, in the case o preference capital, payment of
dividends is not legally binding on the firm and even if the dividends are paid, it is not a
charge on earnings; rather it is a distribution or appropriate of earnings to preference
shareholders. One may, therefore, be tempted to conclude that the dividends on
preference capital do not constitute cost. This is not true.
The cost of preference capital is a function of the dividend expected by investors for
Preference capital is never issued with an intention not to pay dividends. Although it not
legally binding upon the firm to pay dividends on preference capital, yet it is general
paid when the firm makes sufficient profits. The failure to pay dividends, although does
not cause bankruptcy, yet it can be a serious matter from the ordinary shareholders
point of view. The non-payment of dividends on preference capital may result in voting
rights and control to the preference shareholders. More than this, the firm's credit
standing may be damaged. The accumulation of preference dividend arrears may
adversely affect the prospects of ordinary shareholders for receiving any dividends
because dividends on preference capital represent a prior claim on profits. As
consequence, the firm may find difficulty in raising funds by issuing preference to equity
shares. Also, the market value of the equity shares can be adversely affected if
dividends are not paid to the preference shareholders and, therefore, to the equity
shareholders. For these reasons, dividends on preference capital should be paid
regularly except when the firm does not make profits, or it is in a very tight cash
position.
2.2.1 Irredeemable Preference Share
The preference share may be treated as a perpetual security if it is irredeemable. Thus,
its cost is given by the following equation:
Kp = (17)
Where kp is the cost of preference share, PDIV is the expected preference dividend]
and Po is the issue price of preference share.
Illustration 2.10: Cost of Irredeemable Preference Share
A company issues 10 per cent irredeemable preference shares. The face value per
share is Rs. 100, but the issue price is Rs. 95. What is the cost of a preference share?
What is the cost if the issue price is Rs. 105?
We can compute cost of a preference share as follows:
Issue price Rs. 95: Kp = = = 0.1053 or 10.53%
Issue price Rs. 105: : Kp = = = 0.0952 or 9.52%
2.2.2 Redeemable Preference Share
Redeemable preference shares (that is, preference shares with finite maturity) are also
issued in practice..These shares are issued for a particular period and at the expiry of
that period, they are redeemed and principal is paid back to the preference
shareholders. The characteristics are very similar to debt and therefore the calculations
will be similar too. For finding cost of redeemable preference shares, following formula
can be used. These shares are issued for a particular period and at the expiry of that
period, they are redeemed and principal is paid back to the preference shareholders.
The characteristics are very similar to debt and therefore the calculations will be similar
too. A formula similar to previous equation can be used to compute the cost of
redeemable preference share
P0 = ∑t=1 to n [ PDIV / (1 +Kp)
t ] + [ Pn / (1 + Kp)n
] (18)
Here, preference share is traded at say P0 with dividend payments ‘D’ and principal
repayment ‘P’. The cost of debt is designated by Kp. Kp can be determined by solving
above equation. In Equation (18), k, is the cost of preference capital. Given the current
price, expected preference dividend (PDIV,), and maturity price Kf can be found by trial
and error.
The cost of preference share is not adjusted for taxes because preference dividend is
paid after the corporate taxes have been paid. Preference dividends do not save any
taxes. Thus, the cost of preference capital is automatically computed on an after-tax
basis. Since interest is tax deductible and preference dividend is not, the after-tax cost
of preference capital is substantially higher than the after-tax cost of debt.
2.3 COST OF EQUITY CAPITAL AND RETAINED EARNINGS
Cost of equity share is the part of cost of capital which allows the payment to only the
equity shareholders. In this every shareholders get the shares for getting the return on
the shares on which they are investing so much. From company's perspective the
company must earn more than cost of equity capital in order to be unaffected by the
market value of the shares of its. Firms may raise equity capital internally by retaining
earnings. Alternatively, they could distribute the entire earnings to equity shareholders
and raise equity capital externally by issuing new shares. In both cases, shareholders
are providing funds to the firms to finance their capital expenditures. Therefore, the
equity shareholders' required rate of return would be the same whether they supply
funds by purchasing new shares or by foregoing dividends, which could have been
distributed to them.
2.3.1 Is Equity Capital Free of Cost?
It is sometimes argued that the equity capital is free of cost. The reason for such
argument is that it is not legally binding for firms to pay dividends to ordinary
shareholders. Further, unlike the interest rate or preference dividend rate, the equity
dividend rate is not fixed. It is fallacious to assume equity capital to be free of cost. As
we have discussed earlier, equity capital involves an opportunity cost; ordinary
shareholders supply funds to the firm in the expectation of dividends and capital gains
commensurate with their risk of investment. The market value of the shares determined
by the demand and supply forces in a well functioning capital market reflects the return
required by ordinary shareholders. Thus, the shareholders' required rate of return, which
equates the present value of the expected dividends with the market value of the share,
is the cost of equity. The cost of external equity would, however, be more than the
shareholders' required rate of return if the issue price were different from the market
price of the share.
2.3.2 Cost of Internal Equity: The methods of computing the cost of internal and
external equity are discussed below.
1) Dividend yield method or Price ratio method
In this the minimum rate of cost of equity shares will be equal to the “present value of
future dividend per share with current price of a share”.
Cost of equity shares= Dividend per equity/ Market price
For example if there is a company which issues shares of Rs. 200 each a premium of
10%. The company pays 20% dividend to equity shareholders for the past five years
and expects to maintain the same in the future also. Compute the cost of equity capital.
Will it be different if market price of equity share is Rs. 260?
The solution can be found out by our formula which says
Cost of equity shares= Dividend per equity/ Market price
= 20*100/210
= 9.52%
If the market price of equity share is Rs. 260.
=20* 100/260 = 7.69%
2) Dividend yield plus growth in dividend method
It is based on the theory that company is growing and its shares market value is also on
growth. So, because of this shareholders are in need of simple dividend, so that
company can provide the profit to them according to the growth.
To calculate this formula is as follows:- Cost of equity share = Dividend per equity/Market Price + Rate of growth in dividends
3) Earning yield method
In this cost of equity capital is minimum and the earning of the company should be
considered on market price of share. The formula for this is as follows:- Cost of equity share = Earnings per share / Market Price per share
4) Realised yield method
This method removes the drawback which in the dividend yield method or earning yield
method as both are based on future estimation of dividend or earning. In the economics
there are many factors which can't be controlled and are very uncertain and if the risk is
involved then the future planning can't be used and the decision related estimation
return on investment can't be considered. It is based on actual earning which is earned
on the amount of investment. The equity share capital is calculated as:- Cost of equity share = Actual earnings per share * 100
2.3.3 Earning-Price Ratio and the Cost of Equity
Earnings per share (EPS) are the amount of earning per each share of a company's
stock. Companies require the EPS for their each income statement which shows about
the continuing operations, discontinued operations, net income and outstanding items.
EPS doesn't depend on the increase or decrease of the earning power of the company
and gets calculated over number of years.
How is it calculated?
Earnings per share ratio (EPS Ratio) are calculated by dividing the net profit after taxes
and preference dividend by the total number of equity shares. It is a small variance of
return on equity capital ratio. The formula of Earning per share ratio is given as:-
“[Earnings per share (EPS) Ratio = (Net profit after tax - Preference dividend) / No. of
equity shares (common shares)]”
. For example, if the current market price of a share is Rs. 500 (face value being Rs
100) and the earning per share is Rs. 10, the E/P ratio will be: Rs 10 / Rs. 500 = 0.02 or
2 per cent. Does this mean that the expectation of shareholders is 2 per cent? They
would, in fact, expect to receive a stream of dividends and a final price of the share that
would result in a return significantly greater than the E/P ratio. Thus, the dividend
valuation model gives the most of valid measure of the cost of equity.
Illustration 2.13: Earnings-Price Ratio and the Cost of Equity
A firm is currently earning Rs. 100,000 and its share is selling at a market price of Rs.
80. The firm has 10,000 shares outstanding and has no debt. The earnings of the firmare expected to remain stable, and it has a payout ratio of 100 per cent. What is the
cost of equity? If the firm's payout ratio is assumed to be 60 per cent and that it earns
15 per cent rate of return on its investment opportunities, then, what would be the firm's
cost of equity?.
In the first case since expected growth rate is zero, we can use expected earnings-price
ratio to compute the cost of equity. Thus:
Ke= Rs10/80=0.125 or 12.5%
The earnings per share are Rs. 100,000 /10,000 = Rs. 10. If the firm pays out 60 per
cent of its earnings, the dividends per share will be: Rs. 10 x 0.6 = Rs. 6, and the
retention ratio will be 40 per cent. If the expected return on interval investment
opportunities is 15 per cent, then the firm's expected growth is: 0.40 x 0.15 = 0.06 or 6
per cent. The firm's cost of equity will be:
Ke= Rs6/80+0.06=0.135=13.5%
2.4 COMBINED COST OF CAPITAL
Once the component costs have been calculated, they are multiplied by the proportions
of the respective sources of capital to obtain the weighted average cost of capital
(WACC). The proportions of capital must be based on target capital structure. WACC is
the composite or overall cost of capital. You may note that it is the weighted average
concept, not the simple average, which is relevant in calculating the overall cost of
capital. The simple average cost of capital is not appropriate to use because firms
hardly use various sources of funds equally in the capital structure. The following steps
are involved for calculating the firm's WACC:  Calculate the cost of specific sources of funds
 Multiply the cost of each source by its proportion in the capital structure.  Add the weighted component costs to get the WACC.
In financial decision-making, the cost of capital should be calculated on an after tax
basis. Therefore, the component costs should be the after-tax costs. 2.5 SUMMARY
 The cost of capital to a firm is the minimum return which the suppliers of capital
require. In other words, it is the price of obtaining capital; it is a compensation for
time and risk.  The cost of capital concept is of vital significance in financial decision making. It is
used: (a) as a discount, or cut-off, rate for evaluating investment projects, (6) for
designing the firm's debt-equity mix and (c) for appraising the top management's
financial performance.  Debt includes all interest-bearing borrowings. Its cost is the yield (return) which
lenders expect from their investment. In most cases, return is equal to the annual
contractual rate of interest (also called coupon rate). Interest charges are tax
deductible. Therefore, the cost of debt to the firm should be calculated after
adjusting for interest tax shield: where kd is before-tax cost of debt and T is the
corporate tax rate.
 Equity includes paid-up capital and reserve and surplus (retained earnings). Equity
has no explicit cost, as payment of dividends is not obligatory. However, it involves
an opportunity cost.  Three steps are involved in calculating the firm's weighted average cost of capital
(WACC). First, the component costs of debt and equity are calculated. Second,
weights to each component of capital are assigned according to the target capital
structure. Third, the product of component costs and weights is summed up to
determine WACC. The weighted average cost of new capital is the weighted
marginal cost of capital (WMCC). WACC for a firm which debt and equity in the
capital structure, is given by the following formula:
Where ke is the cost of equity, kd is the cost of debt, T is the tax rate, D is d and £ is
equity. The market value weights should be used in calculating WAC
2. 6 QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
Short-Answer Questions
1. Define cost of capital. Explain its significance in financial decision-making,
2. How is the cost of debt computed? How does it differ from the cost of preference
capital?
Long-Answer Questions
1. A company has 5,000,000 ordinary shares outstanding. The market price of the
share is Rs. 96 while the book value is Rs. 65. The firm's earnings and dividends
per share are X 10 and Rs. 7, respectively. The company wants to issue
1,000,000 shares with net proceeds of Rs. 80 per share. What is the cost of
capital of the new issue?